Almeida R et al, 2023 A game changer Joint Design Journey of PREMS and PROMS in the HOSMARTAI
virtual coach study. International Journal of Integrated Care 23(S1):586 DOI:
doi.org/10.5335/ijic.ICIC23586
POSTER ABSTRAC T
A game changer Joint Design Journey of PREMS and PROMS in the
HOSMARTAI vir tual coach study
23rd International Conf erence on Integrated Care, Antwerp, Flanders, 22-24 May 2023
Rosa Almeida1, Dian a Filipa Marques1, Raquel Losada Durán1, Yolanda Bueno Aguado1,
Teresa Cid-Bartolomé1, Silvia González-González2, Magda Hatzikou3
1: Intras Foundation, Vall adolid,Castilla y León, Spain
2: ITCL Technological Cen terBurgos, Castilla y Léon, Spain
3: Pharmecons Easy Acce ss, York, Yorkshire, United Kingdom
Background: HosmartAI, “Hospital Smart development based on AI” (H2020, GA.101016834),
stands for effective and efficient healthcare system transformation creating a common open
integration platform offering multifaceted lasting functionalities (e.g. Marketplace, Co-creation
space, Benchmarking tool) to healthcare stakeholders. This platform will allow the collection and
analysis of highly relevant datasets to support decision-making. For validating the concept and AI
platform, the project includes 8 Lighthouse Pilots, between them, a complementary system aimed
to support older adults in their homes or in clinical centres to perform training, prevention and
rehabilitation activities. In this sense, appropriate quality measures and methods are fundamental
for a continuous improvement of care services. However, the use of PREMs in a continuous and
systematic way portrays a recent and still scarcely implemented approach.
Objective: This case study presents the process that led to the participatory definition of the
productivity, efficiency and quality measures for the HosmartAI virtual assistant for a continuity of
care in neuropsychological rehabilitation and elderly care.
Methods: The HOSMARTAI co-creation methodology focused on exploring the care journey
through two initial cycles involving 24 participants to empathize, define collaboratively user
requirements and ideate the solution use paths. In the process was included the selection and
adjustment of the most valuable assessment indicators with a double goal to validate the
approach in a pilot study and of value for the different parts (patients, therapists, healthcare
services managers).
Results/Discussion: The process contributes to meet the end-users’ demands. Firstly, the co-
creation process allowed deepening the understanding of the context, the health system and the
challenges perceived by people in the primary-user condition, to identify significant concepts of
interest for the response, and to reach an appropriate direction, taking into account the patients
key points of interest. It was the base to define collaboratively an assessment protocol for the
proposed system to address the commented challenges, with a key focus on the Patient Reported
Experience which data has the potential to narrow the gap between the therapists’ and patients’
views and help tailor treatment plans to meet the patients’ preferences and needs. The resulting
assessment protocol ensure a combination of suitable set of PROMs and PREMs, where PREMs
capture in detail the patients’ experience perception with the technology and the service(s)
Alm eida: A game changer Joint Design Journey of PREMS and PROMS in the HOSMARTAI virtual coach study.
offered through it. From the key considerations, ensuring a soft evaluation approach including
data collected throughout seamless interactions with the service interfaces (tablet and social
robot) at appropriate moments of the interventions that are complemented with easy to answer
questionnaires and semi-structured interviews, ensuring an assessment approach to the patient
so natural, intuitive and pleasant as possible.
Conclusions: This work contributes to the solution development, validation and standardisation,
enabling the delivery of high quality care from the perspective of the different stakeholders with a
special focus on the end-users. This research continues collecting lessons learnt from the
process, such as the need to adopt a flexible co-design framework with stakeholders (including
primary and secondary users) and open to regular adjustment/revision of PREMs and PROMs on
these highly changing contexts.