Aging Clinical and Experimental Research (2023) 35:1127–1138
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40520-023-02394-y
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Healthcare professionals’ perception of using a web‑based
reminiscence therapy to support person with dementia
during the COVID‑19 pandemic
Rabia Akhter1 · Winnie Sun1 · Alvaro Joffre Uribe Quevedo2 · Manon Lemonde1 · Ramiro Liscano3 ·
Sheri Horsburgh4
Received: 25 January 2023 / Accepted: 13 March 2023 / Published online: 3 April 2023
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
Abstract
Background Reminiscence therapy (RT) is the most common non-pharmacological treatment for dementia care. The therapy
stimulates the senses to evoke memories having the potential to reduce Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms of Demen-
tia (BPSD). Digital RT, such as web-based reminiscence therapy (WBRT), has the potential to support dementia care and
reduce the caregiving burden.
Aims This study aimed to explore healthcare professionals (HCPs) perceptions of utilizing WBRT in institutionalized set-
tings to support persons with dementia during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Methods A qualitative phenomenological descriptive study was adopted and guided by Graham's Knowledge to Action
framework. Online training on the use of WBRT was conducted, followed by interviews with HCPs.
Results Four major themes were identified on the potential use of WBRT in dementia care, including usability and efficacy,
impact on caregiving, capability of reducing BPSD, and. feasibility during COVID-19 social distancing.
Discussion This study recognized the potential use of WBRT to support the person with dementia during the pandemic in
institutionalized settings.
Conclusion The knowledge generated from this study will guide the future application of WBRT to support dementia care
in diverse healthcare settings.
Keywords Dementia · Reminiscence therapy · Digital · Web-based · COVID-19
Background
progression [1]. The clinical presentation of BPSD includes
anxiety, depression, agitation (a state of anxiety), restless-
Behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia ness, aggression (hostile or violent behaviors), hallucination
(BPSD) are among the most serious complications of (unreal perceptions), delusions (false beliefs), apathy (lack
dementia. Approximately 80% of persons with demen- of initiative), sleep disturbances, and wandering (moving
tia (PWD) will develop BPSD throughout their disease aimlessly from place to place) [2].
BPSD management is highly challenging for healthcare
professionals (HCPs) due to its complex etiopathogenesis of
*
Rabia Akhter the signs and symptoms. Though no permanent solutions are
rabiaakhter.dr@gmail.com; rabia.akhter@ontariotechu.net
available to manage BPSD and its progressive nature, sev-
1 Faculty of Health Sciences, Ontario Tech University, eral pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatments
Oshawa, ON, Canada (NPT) are proven to be effective [3].
2 Faculty of Business and Information Technology, Ontario Reminiscence therapy (RT) is a form of NPT that sup-
Tech University, Oshawa, ON, Canada port dementia care. It is a treatment that stimulates all the
3 Faculty of Engineering and Applied Science, Ontario Tech senses—sight, sound, touch, smell, and taste—to aid PWDs
University, Oshawa, ON, Canada to remember events, people, and places from their past lives
4 Geriatric Psychiatry Unit, Ontario Shores Centre for Mental [4]. Such cognitive simulation approach can be facilitated
Health Sciences, Whitby, ON, Canada using technology, such as digital photo albums or video
Vol.:(0112 33456789)
1 128 Aging Clinical and Experimental Research (2023) 35:1127–1138
chats with friends and family [5]. In contrast, other forms deliver group RT among the PWD with similar interests. For
of cognitive stimulation using technology, such as brain- instance, if a group of PWD like beaches, a generic picture
training games and puzzles, are designed to improve specific of beaches can be displayed to them during the RT sessions.
cognitive abilities, such as working memory or attention [6, Studies specific to utilization of WBRT are limited;
7]. These structured activities can be challenging, with the however, digital RT provided through an android app has
goal of strengthening cognitive skills over time. While both been reported to decrease the sense of loneliness, reduce
reminiscence therapy and other forms of cognitive stimula- the levels of anxiety and isolation, and improve the overall
tion using technology can be valuable tools for promoting quality of life for PWD. Web-based applications have been
cognitive health and well-being, their approaches and goals found to increase interaction between PWD and caregivers
are distinct [5]. [12]. Moreover, it has been suggested that digital RT may
There is no formal categorization of RT; however, based positively affect the cognitive behavior and emotional well-
on technology, this NPT can be divided into either tradi- being of PWDs [13]. A recent systematic review has also
tional RT or digital RT. In traditional RT, HCPs interact with advocated for the use of technology to facilitate cognitive
PWD through conversations or physical aids like photos or improvement [14]. Since WBRT is a form of digital RT, it
objects from the patient's past life. Digital RT follows a simi- has the potential to be used as an alternative form of RT in
lar philosophy, but the mode of RT delivery uses some form institutionalized settings.
of digital aspect, like a laptop, tablet, smartphone, Virtual As discussed earlier, a limited number of studies have
Reality (VR) device, etc. Although traditional RT slows the investigated technology-based RT in the treatment of
progression of dementia, it has its limitations that need to dementia. To our knowledge, no studies specifically explore
be addressed. The effects of traditional RT are inconsistent whether the web-based RT application can be a potential
and differ considerably across settings and modalities [4]. option for managing BPSD.
The way RT is delivered depends on the HCP's train- There is also a lack of emphasis on utilizing qualitative
ing and expertise. It also depends on the resources available design to explore the perceptions of HCPs in utilizing digital
at the institution. Also, HCPs must provide and repeat the RT to support dementia care. Further research needs to be
dialog several times to remind the PWDs about their past conducted to examine the perceptions of HCPs about the
with the traditional RT. Besides, items required for memory potential benefits of WBRT application and to what extent
triggers must be collected and prepared before each ses- this technology could potentially improve the HCP's capac-
sion, which could be time-consuming and could be seen as a ity to manage BPSD, especially during the challenging time
challenging caregiving responsibility [8]. These issues have of COVID-19 pandemic.
aggravated since the COVID-19 pandemic. The overarching research question of this study is:
It has also been identified from several studies that
"What are HCP's perceptions of using web-based
dementia care in institutionalized settings (particularly long-
RT applications to support the care of person with
term care) has been disproportionately affected during the
dementia with BPSD in the institutionalized setting
pandemic [9, 10]. The high-risk working environment led
during the COVID-19 pandemic and beyond?"
to a staffing shortage in such settings [11]. HCPs have to
conduct a one-on-one sessions with the LTC residents for
care delivery and social, recreational activities while tak-
Methodology
ing extra precautions (such as frequent hand washing, and
wearing Personal Protective Equipment). The social distanc-
Research design
ing protocol among residents of institutionalized settings
also increased the caregiving burden of HCPs. Amidst such
social distancing protocol; digital RT, such as web-based This study adopted a qualitative descriptive phenomeno-
applications, has the potential to advance traditional RT. logical approach and grounded in the knowledge to action
Web-Based Reminiscence Therapy (WBRT) is a form of (KTA) framework by Graham et al. [15] to explore the lived
digital RT application where HCPs can use any device with experiences of HCPs about WBRT to support persons with
a web browser to provide RT. The application allows HCPs dementia with BPSD [15]. KTA framework suggests that
to create separate accounts for each PWD in their care and research findings can be transferred to practice by breaking
upload media contents such as pictures, audio, and videos to them down into two concepts: knowledge creation and the
access them during RT sessions. This feature of the applica- action cycle. The KTA framework was utilized to describe
tion highlights the client-centered care options of RT as indi- the use of web-based application to advance reminiscence
vidualized content of PWD can be uploaded based on their therapy experiences for PWD (Knowledge creation/KC) and
personal life and preferences. The web-based application to explore the potential impact of this technology on reduc-
also has a generic photo album feature which can be used to ing BPSD (Action cycle/AC). This study obtained Ontario
1 3
Aging Clinical and Experimental Research (2023) 35:1127–1138 1129
Shores Centre for Mental Health Sciences and Ontario Tech able to select one of the photo albums and deliver WBRT
University Research Ethics Approval (REB#19-011-B). as a trial. A generic picture has been shown below as an
example (Fig. 1).
Study sample
The WBRT can be exhibited via monitors (TV, desktop,
laptop, tablet, iPad). HCPs can upload password-protected,
We included HCPs that were employed in the Geriatric generalized/ personalized content about their patients accord-
Dementia Unit (GDU) and Geriatric Transitional Unit ing to their preferences and descriptions of patient profiles.
(GTU) in Ontario Shores Centre for Mental Health Sciences, Additionally, HCPs can download the archived contents by
Whitby, Ontario, who were directly working with PWD. logging into their individual accounts and album can be trans-
ferred via email or save as a PDF file. These downloaded
Data collection
contents can then be shared among direct care providers when
patients are discharged/transferred to other setting.
The HCPs were provided with an online education and train-
ing on WBRT using an online (Zoom) platform at a mutually Data analysis
agreed time. During the training, HCPs had the opportunity
to explore the technology virtually. Due to time constraints,
The data analysis process was grounded within Braun and
shortage of devices, and physical restrictions during the
Clarke's [17] six steps thematic analytical model using an
pandemic, HCPs could not try the application physically
excel codebook. It consists of (1) Familiarization of data
and independently. However, they were actively involved
(2) Initial coding (3) Generating themes (4) Validity and
throughout the training session. After the initial demonstra-
reliability of themes (5) Defining and naming themes (6)
tion of the application, the researcher requested the HCPs
Interpretation and reporting.
to ask questions and explore the WBRT interface. During
this stage, the researcher navigated the application based
on the HCPs command. This provided an opportunity for
Results
HCPs to explore the various features and functionality. After
the virtual session, HCPs were interviewed about their lived
A total of ten HCPs were recruited, which consisted of occu-
experience with the WBRT and inquired about their percep-
pational therapists (n = 2), behavioral therapists (n = 2), rec-
tions of using this application in supporting dementia care.
reational therapists (n = 2), social workers (n = 2), and nurses
The HCPs verbally completed a demographic survey prior
(n = 2) (Appendix III).
to the interview (Appendix-I).The estimated duration of the
interview was approximately 30–45 min and was guided by
an interview guide (Appendix-II) which was comprised of Qualitative thematic findings
semi-structured open-ended questions.
A total of four major themes were identified related to the
Description of the technology
application and usability of the WBRT application. The
qualitative findings are summarized in the thematic tree
This WBRT application was created by a team of research- (Fig. 2). Relevant quotes from the interviews were summa-
ers from Ontario Tech University in collaboration with the rized in the Appendix IV.
community partners from Ontario Shores Centre for Mental
Health Sciences in Whitby, Ontario [16]. HCPs of Ontario (1) Usability and efficacy of WBRT
Shores were involved in the co-designing of the WBRT.
During the early stages of the development, a research team (a) User-friendly and inclusiveness HCPs found the user
from Ontario Tech University sought feedback from HCPs interface of WBRT was simple and could be easily
to explore user needs and preferences related to the features navigated by people who knew how to use the internet.
and functionality. Their feedback and suggestions were later The HCPs expressed that the WBRT's user interface
incorporated into the development of the WBRT. allowed both HCPs and family members to participate
The WBRT can be accessed by the HCPs through a link in the reminiscence therapy experience. Family mem-
and log-in page using an individual username and pass- bers can be more engaged with caregiving by uploading
word. The HCP can then have access to the photo album customized content to facilitate RT for their loved ones.
containing generic/personalized pictures or videos suitable In the absence of a family member the HCPs can create
to support reminiscence therapy for PWD. There were wide the account in the WBRT and upload the reminiscence
range of pictures and videos in an album format to choose contents with generic pictures. (Refer to Appendix-2
from. A sample webpage is displayed below. HCPs were Q# 1)
1 3
1 130 Aging Clinical and Experimental Research (2023) 35:1127–1138
Fig. 1 Web-based reminiscence therapy application
(b) Client-centered and individualized approach to ther- tent than traditional methods. (Refer to Appendix-2 Q#
apy The HCPs believed that PWD needs individual- 2, 3)
ized care and providing them with memory triggering (c) Digitalization of RT HCPs agreed that digitalization
content is of immense importance to promote their provided an opportunity to store more information and
sense of well-being. HCPs agreed that WBRT pro- organize the materials needed for RT. They believed
vided a platform to upload customized content (photo, that WBRT would potentially reduce their need for
video, music, etc.) tailored to each individual's needs. paper copies and help them keep all client informa-
This approach added value to their care and increases tion in an accessible and secure place. They also agree
engagement, and PWD may connect more with the con- that RT needs digitalization to make the process more
1 3
Aging Clinical and Experimental Research (2023) 35:1127–1138 1131
a. User-friendly and Inclusiveness
b. Client-centered and individualized approach to therapy
c. Digitalization of RT
Usability and Efficacy
d. Integrated and secured system
e. Increased carer participation
f. Continuity of care
a. Relationship building with PWD
b. Increases understanding of PWD through personalized contents
Impact on caregiving c. Promotes better communication between caregivers and PWD
d. Reduces HCP's workload
e. Facilitates accessibility of RT
a. Improves memory recall, and mental wellbeing
Potential of reducing
b. Alleviates responsive behaviours
BPSD
c. Augments positive self-expression
d. Reduces the risks of social isolation and wandering
Feasibility during a. Improves social connection
COVID-19 social b. Supports family involvement in care
distancing c. Accessible in any settings
Fig. 2 Thematic tree
efficient, streamlined and accessible to them. (Refer to can maintain patient privacy and confidentiality. (Refer
Appendix-2 Q# 4) to Appendix-2 Q# 5, 6)
(d) Integrated and secured system The WBRT includes (e) Increased carer participation Once a patient account
pictures, music, and videos for each patient profile and content have been set in the WBRT, anyone with
under one platform. HCPs can upload and access an access to the technology, such as family members, vol-
individual patient's content without the need to navi- unteers, or HCPs, can view and deliver the RT. Tradi-
gate multiple platforms and places. This integrated tional RT is challenging and time-consuming for both
feature reduces the need for HCPs to arrange RT family members and HCPs. For instance, to provide
contents before every session. Alternatively a printed the traditional RT using Snoezelen (multi-sensory
copy might get lost in an institutionalized setting. Thus, therapy), one needs to be formally trained and certified
using the integrated digital platform is more secure and before providing the therapy. (Refer to Appendix-2 Q#
7)
1 3
1 132 Aging Clinical and Experimental Research (2023) 35:1127–1138
(f) Continuity of care Family members or loved ones can tiple HCPs throughout their stay. The WBRT could act
upload artifacts remotely and update the album accord- as a repository of each patient, and staff can access the
ing to the needs of their loved ones. HCPs no longer content whenever required. The HCPs do not have to
need to wait for the hard copies of pictures or videos collect the reminiscence contents each time prior to the
to be delivered for the therapy; this will promote the therapy. Any staff could log into the WBRT using any
continuity of the caregiving process in a timely manner. device, which makes the delivery of RT more acces-
In addition, the patient album could be transferred via sible to PWD at anytime and in any location. (Refer to
secured email or downloaded and saved as a PDF file Appendix-2 Q# 13)
by authorized personnel. This feature would aid in shar- (3) Potential of reducing BPSD
ing RT contents among facilities and assist caregivers (a) Improves memory recall and mental wellbeing The
in continuing the therapy with their loved ones at home HCPs indicated that WBRT application could be used
or in other healthcare settings. (Refer to Appendix-2 Q# to help recall good memories of PWD. When being
8) away from home and in a unfamiliar environment,
(2) Impact on caregiving PWD might get anxious and become disconnected.
(a) Relationship building with PWD The HCPs indicated By viewing personal images and videos, PWD could
that the WBRT could potentially increase the connec- feel more connected with their family members, and
tion between HCPs and PWD. Due to the personalized thereby improving their mental wellbeing. (Refer to
contents of the WBRT and its client-centered features, Appendix-2 Q# 14)
this could help HCPs know their patients on a more (b) Alleviates responsive behaviors During the interview, it
personal level and help to strengthen the therapeutic was identified that WBRT may positively impact BPSD.
rapport. (Refer to Appendix-2 Q# 9) The WBRT can potentially alleviate responsive behav-
(b) Increases understanding of PWD through person- iors such as anxiety, depression, restlessness, and exit-
alized contents WBRT could aid HCPs in increasing seeking behaviors among PWD. HCPs discussed the
their understanding of their patients, such as personal potential of WBRT in reducing irritability and physical
background and history. Viewing individual albums and verbal agitation. (Refer to Appendix-2 Q# 15)
with images, music, and videos will enhance HCP's (c) Augments positive self-expression PWD often deals
understanding of the patient prior to the implementa- with restlessness and distress, impacting their confidence
tion of RT. HCPs would be able to better connect with and quality of life. HCPs indicated that the WBRT could
PWD to facilitate dementia care. During the interview, potentially instill a positive mindset and enhance self-
all the HCPs preferred a personalized album over the expression by connecting PWD with their loved ones
public album, and they indicated that personalized con- through the review of their life histories during reminis-
tent would be more relevant and meaningful to PWD cence experiences. (Refer to Appendix-2 Q# 16)
than generic content. (Refer to Appendix-2 Q# 10) (d) Reduces the risks of social isolation and wandering
(c) Promotes better communication between caregivers Due to the decrease in social interaction and communi-
and PWD Communicating with PWD can be challeng- cation with others, PWD often feels lonely and isolated.
ing for HCPs during the disease progression. Due to HCPs stated that the WBRT could potentially reduce
the reduced receptive and expressive communication loneliness and risks of wandering by connecting their
skills, PWD can experience difficulty in interacting with past lives to the present through the narratives of remi-
other people. The HCPs indicated that the WBRT could niscence journey. (Refer to Appendix-2 Q# 17)
generate meaningful conversation and facilitate effective (4) Feasibility during COVID 19 social distancing
communication with PWD. (Refer to Appendix-2 Q# (a) Improves social connection COVID-19 social distanc-
11) ing has impacted the life of PWD and their informal
(d) Reduces HCP's workload PWD needs extra time and caregivers, such as family members or loved ones, by
attention for care, which would likely increase HCP's reducing social connection. Due to visitor restrictions,
workload. The WBRT could reduce HCPs' workload as family members were not allowed to visit their loved
they can retrieve all the personalized contents of PWD ones in institutionalized settings during certain stages
in a single platform. HCPs highlighted the simplicity of the pandemic. The WBRT has the functionality to
and efficiency of the WBRT and how it could ease their virtually connect families from a distance, thereby
caregiving responsibility by knowing their patients' enhancing their social relations and potentially reduc-
needs and preferences. (Refer to Appendix-2 Q# 12) ing their sense of loneliness. (Refer to Appendix-2 Q#
(e) Facilitates accessibility of RT In a dementia-care insti- 18)
tutional setting, each PWD could be managed by mul- (b) Supports family involvement in care Due to the social
distancing protocol, it was challenging for family mem-
1 3
Aging Clinical and Experimental Research (2023) 35:1127–1138 1133
bers to deliver reminiscence contents in-person. HCPs study expanded the scope of previous research by includ-
indicated that through WBRT, family members could ing HCPs from multiple disciplines, including recreational
upload personalized content remotely at their conveni- therapists, occupational therapists, behavioral therapist,
ence allowing them to positively contribute and get social workers and nurses and found similar results which
involved in the care and treatment of their loved ones. underscore the practical application of digital RT.
(Refer to Appendix-2 Q# 19) Digital technology can support PWD to combat their
(c) Accessible in any settings The WBRT can store the disease progression. It also has a significant influence on
digital individualized contents to support reminiscence their mental health and well-being by managing BPSD
therapy (i.e., audio-visual prompts) and it be accessed symptoms. A case study by Rehm et al. (2016) has identi-
remotely from any setting using the internet. (Refer to fied that web-based applications would be feasible among
Appendix-2 Q# 20) PWD in residential aged care facilities. It has the potential
to improve cognitive behavior and reduce depression and
anxiety [23]. Our current study recognized that WBRT
Discussion
could potentially make a positive impact on improving
mental health and positivity among PWD through the
The primary purpose of this study was to explore HCPs' multi-sensory stimulation offered by reminiscence expe-
perception of the usefulness of WBRT to assist reminiscence riences in institutionalized healthcare settings.
experiences in institutionalized settings. Studies have found WBRT could store all the media in a single platform
that innovative technologies can be used to provide RT [5]. and be navigated through multiple devices such as lap-
Similarly, the digital technologies offer availability and tops, desktops, and tablets using the internet, which pro-
multi-user access to the patient file in real-time, which leads motes the accessibility of the intervention to be used in
to simplification and acceleration of healthcare processes. It any healthcare setting. The importance of accessibility of
also improves care coordination and optimizes health care technology in healthcare services is critical, as it provides
management costs [18]. Once the WBRT account has been consistency and continuity of care and better patient man-
developed for a particular patient, staff, volunteers, and fam- agement. It can also decrease human errors, increase clini-
ily members could view the patient profile, background and cal outcomes, facilitate care coordination, and improve
history to guide the RT. Such functionality is beneficial for practice efficiencies [24].
RT as it boosts consistency and continuity of dementia care
[19].
Our current study found that HCPs may connect better
Limitations of the study
with PWD through WBRT by developing a therapeutic rap-
port with them. The personalized album options of WBRT
could aid HCPs in knowing their patients' personal lives and The current study evaluated the potential use of WBRT
preferences in a timely manner, thereby facilitating client- from a small sample of HCPs (n = 10), which can be con-
centered care. Client-centered care is a significant princi- sidered a study limitation. Although the data have been
ple for dementia care as it prioritizes PWDs' well-being, collected from a variety of HCPs such as nurses, occupa-
promotes the strengths of PWD's, and honors their choices tional, recreational, and behavioral therapists, and social
and values [20]. Additionally, client-centered care focuses workers, it did not include the perceptions from the physi-
on the unmet needs of PWD and can create positive patient cians and the family members, who may be able to offer
outcomes, including better quality of life, reduced agitation additional perceptions regarding the utilization of WBRT
and challenging behaviors [21]. to support dementia care during the COVID-19 pandemic.
An earlier study by Samuelsson and Ekström (2019) In addition, the study was conducted in only one health-
examined the application of personalized versus gener- care setting; therefore, the transferability of study findings
alized content using web-based applications in a resi- may be limited. Future research expanding the sample size
dential home facility. They video recorded and analyzed to include HCPs from diverse healthcare settings to better
the interaction between PWD (n = 6) and nurses (n = 3) understand the various HCP's perceptions regarding the
and conducted a semi-structured interview with PWD to applications of WBRT in dementia care may be of benefit.
evaluate their web-based application experience [22]. Our
1 3
1 134 Aging Clinical and Experimental Research (2023) 35:1127–1138
The researcher conducted the interview immediately Appendix
after the technology training; thus, HCPs didn't have the
opportunity to explore and navigate the application by
themselves. Future research should focus on assessing Appendix I: Socio‑demographic data form
user experiences once HCPs adopt WBRT as part of their for study participant
routine dementia care.
Participant number Date
Future implications
. .
Our findings explore the potential role of utilizing a web-
based application to support RT delivery to PWD in an insti- Please tell us the following information
tutionalized setting. The WBRT is simple to use and can be about yourself
accessed through any types of digital device, which could
potentially be used by the HCPs in any healthcare setting.
The study findings highlighted the need for improving the
(1) Please check one of the following categories that apply
accessibility of WBRT by implementing appropriate educa-
to you
tional training among HCPs to promote increased utilization
of the technology. Overall, findings from this study provide
I am a Registered Nurse □ Registered Practical Nurse □
support of the value of WBRT, as well as some opportuni-
Recreation Therapist □ Personal Support Worker □
ties for future developments to optimize the delivery of RT
and dementia care.
Other □
(2) What is your age range?
Conclusions
18–29 □, 30–39 □, 40–49 □, 50–59 □, 60–69 □, 70+ □
Our study results suggest that the WBRT application can
be used as an effective intervention in dementia care. HCPs
(3) What is your gender?Male □ Female □ Other □
perceived that WBRT has the potential to reduce caregiving
burden and improve the management of BPSD. They also
Prefer not to answer □
highlighted that WBRT could play an important role in bet-
ter supporting dementia care during and post pandemics.
(4) What is the highest level of education completed?
This study provides a starting point for future large-scale
intervention research to understand the impacts of WBRT (a) Some grade school/high school □
in patient outcomes. It also provides guidance to policy (b) High School Diploma/ GED □
makers on the critical factors that needs to be taken into (c) College Diploma □
consideration prior to implementing digital RT or similar (d) University (i.e., BscN) □
technologies. Future research should examine the benefits (e) Graduate program (i.e., Master’s; PhD) □
of integrating both web-based application and immersive (f) Prefer not to answer □
virtual reality technology to enhance the reminiscence
experiences for PWD to support dementia care in diverse
(5) What is your employment status?
healthcare settings. Our study findings provide implica-
tions to stakeholders and policy makers on transforming (a) Full-time □
the traditional RT therapy through digital technology to (b) Part-time □
support technology-enabled dementia care during the cur- (c) Casual □
rent pandemic and beyond. (d) Retired □
(6) For how many years are you working as a healthcare
professional?
1 3
Aging Clinical and Experimental Research (2023) 35:1127–1138 1135
(7) How many years of working experience in institution- (15) Is there anything else you would like to say that I have
alized care settings do you have? _______ not asked about?
(8) Do you have any formal training in working with
patients with dementia? If yes, please define: (i.e.,
Appendix III: Descriptive summary
certification in gerontology; cognitive rehabilitation
of demographic data
etc.) ___________________________
(9) How many years of working experience with persons
with dementia do you have? __________
(10) How many years of experience do you have with tra- Experience working (in
years)
ditional reminiscence therapy? –––-
Par- Age Gender Education As In With With
tici- range HCP institu- PWD tradi-
Appendix II: Interview guide pant tional- tional
ized RT
set-
Interview prompt questions tings
OT1 18– Male Graduate 3 3 3 No
(1) What prompted you to agree to this interview?
29 program
(2) Tell me about your experience of reminiscence ther-
OT2 18– Female Graduate 3 2.5 2 No
apy in managing BPSD? (Types of RT you have been 29 program
using? Advantages and disadvantages of it.) BT1 30– Female Graduate 5 2 1 No
(3) Did you have experienced using technologies for 39 program
reminiscence therapy before? If yes, what is your BT2 40– Female University 22 22 15 Yes
49 (BscN)
preferred method of delivering reminiscence therapy
RT1 30– Female University 7 6 2 Yes
among PWD (traditional/digital)?
39 (BscN)
(4) What is your overall impression of using web-based
RT2 40– Female College 25 25 20 Yes
reminiscence therapy application?
49 diploma
(5) How far do you think using the web-based application
SW1 30– Female Graduate 8 3 4 No
may affect your relationship with PWD? Why? 39 program
(6) What impacts do you anticipate with the use of SW2 50– Female Graduate 20 20 7 Yes
web-based reminiscence therapy on your caregiving 59 program
responsibilities? N1 40– Male University 12 12 12 No
49 (BscN)
(7) Do you think using this digital technology during
N2 30– Female University 14 14 14 No
COVID-19 social distancing is feasible? Why or why
39 (BscN)
not?
(8) What are your thoughts on substituting the web-based
application with traditional RT at institutionalized set-
tings? Why? Appendix IV: Quotes from the thematic
(9) Do you think PWD could use this technology for self- analysis
management? Why or why not?
(10) Did you experience any difficulties in using web-
Usability and efficacy of WBRT
based applications? What were the challenges?
(11) What are your perceptions of potential facilitators
User‑friendly and inclusiveness
in implementing web-based applications in dementia
care?
Q#1: "I think it's incredibly user-friendly. I think
(12) What are your perceptions of potential barriers in
it's super well thought out. I think it certainly meets
implementing web-based applications in dementia
the needs of our patients here at Ontario shores, and
care?
I really like the fact that not only can an account be
(13) What is your opinion on using personalized content
made through a staff, but a caregiver can also partici-
(picture/ video) as RT for PWD? Do you think this
pate in that form of engagement, and then if patients
would be helpful? Why or why not?
don't have caregivers or families …. at least staff still
(14) Will you recommend others to use this web-based
have the opportunity to be able to make an account
technology as reminiscence therapy? Why or why
for the patient and include things that are maybe more
not?
1 3
1 136 Aging Clinical and Experimental Research (2023) 35:1127–1138
public based pictures like you were showing..,.... So, I Increased carer participation Q#7: "I think it (WBRT)
like that they’re not leaving out everybody. It's kind of can save a lot of time …, the patient will still require to
inclusive to everybody." [OT2] have one-on-one person to be with them, and go through
the information, but I think… somebody like volunteer
Client‑centered and individualized approach to therapy for example, or a staff member or family member would
be able to conduct and support being able to view the
Q#2: " I think you can certainly be more in touch with reminiscence therapy, whereas the more traditional
families if the families are technically savvy and have methods like Snoezelen, for example, it does require
the ability to draw on personal experiences, memo- people to be formally trained and certified before they're
ries, preferences, and individuality. I think it is impor- able to operate certain functions of this Snoezelen so that
tant, and it's more meaningful for them when they go in some ways we'll be able to open up the opportunity
through something like that, and it speaks to them. for a lot more participation from various parties."[SW1]
Like I said, diversion and distraction are critical when
Continuity of care Q#8: "One of the barriers is getting to
it comes to managing BPSD, and if you can catch
know the person before their dementia. Because before,
the person's attention and maintain it for any length
I relied so heavily on seeing the family weekly, where
of time, then that's a success. So, and I do think that
now there's that disconnect.… On more of a personal
use of this kind of technology would certainly work
level and with the content being able to be uploaded
towards that goal." [BT2]
regularly, I can learn more what kind of interventions
Q#3: "What I see and what I've seen so far, it (WBRT)
or images work best for them and what they connect to
looks really good. So, I would recommend the use of
most and maybe what ones see a disconnect. I'm on a
it because it's just so much easier for the caregiver
council where we're looking forward at what dementia
to have the ability to upload photos. We can also
care within our facility is going to look like, and one of
upload images, videos, whatever they provide us. It's
the big things from a recreational therapy perspective
very client-centered, so it's definitely a great tool to
is that I've realized there's a deficit in being able to pass
use." [OT1]
on information and toolkits about a patient to their next
facility. So when they're returning back to the long-term
Digitalization of RT Q#4: "I think that (WBRT) defi-
care home, if I could give the caretaker that information
nitely an advancement, because currently we’re going
to send along, they could continue to utilize that inter-
more digital on how I'm performing my reminiscence
vention for the patient."[RT1]
therapy, and our patients are able to connect on the
larger screen with that, so it will support, especially
Impact on caregiving
when you look at a lot of our aging population now is
at a younger age where they connect with technology
Relationship building with PWD
anyway, so it would be accessible for them" [RT1]
Q#9: "I think it (WBRT) will benefit our relationships.
Integrated and secured system Q#5: "I'm all for it, I
I think it will not only provide engagement for our
think it's a better idea because it's much easier to be
patients, but it will also allow us as staff to get to know
able to bring somebody on an iPad or a computer that
our patients on a deeper level, which can help with over-
everybody shares. That's kept in the same spot but has
all empathy and understanding of where the patient came
everybody's information in separate folders. Rather
from or what their background is about, so I think it'll
than having multiple pieces of paper, or multiple books
strengthen therapeutic rapport."[OT2]
lying around, so I think it will be much more organized
and you know the videos, the pictures, everything will
Increases understanding of PWD through personalized
all be there together. So it's not coming from different
contents
places." [RT2]
Q#6: "You know, as being in a hospital setting, it's
Q#10: "I think that a lot of times people with severe
always preferred not to have things in print laying
dementia, we are not able to get to know them in ways
around with patient's personal information. So I think
where they (PWD) can express themselves. So I think it
if it's all (information) just embedded within technol-
(WBRT) allows a practitioner to be able to learn more
ogy...it makes it a little bit more secure." [BT1]
1 3
Aging Clinical and Experimental Research (2023) 35:1127–1138 1137
about the patient through the media that they're view- Augments positive self‑expression
ing."- [SW1]
Q#16: "So some of the symptoms that I notice most
Promotes better communication between caregivers is exit seeking behavior, and I could see having the
and PWD reminiscence therapy as a way to alleviate that, so if
they're able to connect with something familiar, you
Q#11: "Yes, I do think it (Personalized WBRT) would would see a decrease in that behavior. And with that
be helpful. I think both receptive and expressive com- also comes distress, right? So a decrease in distress,
munication is often impaired in dementia and any such as wanting to be at home and being in an unfa-
other use that you can use to augment what you're try- miliar environment. If they were able to look at images
ing to say. So whether it's words and visual stimuli from their house or images of their loved ones. We
like pictures is going to help you get your meaning would see more of positive self-expression coming
across."[BT2] from patients."[RT1]
Reduces HCP's workload
Reduces the risks of social isolation and wandering
Q#12: "I think it's (WBRT) great as you're learning
Q#17: “It (WBRT) could potentially help with feelings
more about the patient because they're only technically
of loneliness and the wandering as well. So if they are
here for 59 days. It does go by quickly. I know it does
wandering, they might be looking for their mom or
seem like a long time, but it goes by super quickly, so
looking for their sister or brother or their son. Yeah,
the quicker you know the patient their likes, hobbies,
I think it could help redirect them. It could help also
interests, and dislikes. You're building that therapeu-
reassure them."[BT1]
tic rapport to make treatment a lot easier hopefully, I
really like that you get to learn more about the patient,
Feasibility during COVID 19 social distancing
and I think that it really just speeds up the work.. and
it makes your job a little bit easier too."[OT1]
Improves social connection
Facilitates accessibility of RT
Q#18: "Absolutely, I think it's feasible because espe-
cially when we're looking at it being a web-based
Q#13: "I think this (WBRT) is helpful because every-
application where families from a distance can apply
body would have access to it at once. I could have it on
the personalized images or from their cellular devices,
a computer, and then if an additional staff had to view
it allows for them to connect with their loved ones
it, they wouldn't have to look for it. It would just be on
even from a distance. And I think with the added use
the computer as well, and you wouldn't have to worry
of technology on our unit as well, if there was a loved
about losing it either."[N1].
one wanting to view how that reminiscence therapy is
Potential of reducing BPSD: working for their loved one and see their reactions, we
also would be able to use our other web-based con-
nections with the family to connect them with that
Improves memory recall and mental well‑being
experience."[BT1]
Q#14: “It (WBRT) will help… maybe recalling fond
Supports family involvement in care
memories. I think that it can…, improve quality of
life." [OT1]
Q#19: "I think it is super easy to use, and obviously
Alleviates responsive behaviors with COVID-19, you're trying to social distance from
one another, and you don't need to have family mem-
Q#15: "Like it (WBRT) will help reduce physically bers directly coming in to drop off physical pictures,
responsive behaviors, verbal aggression.. I think it videos, whatever. It may be, like I said, they can
can also help with more, so just anxiety and anxious- upload it from home wherever they are and then you
ness and then kind of reduce physical, verbal response can get that and provide it to the client. So definitely
behavior such as being anxious, restlessness and hav- very feasible for family members". [OT1]
ing psychomotor agitation."[OT1]
1 3
1 138 Aging Clinical and Experimental Research (2023) 35:1127–1138
Accessible in any settings L, Xhafa F, Conesa J (eds) Advances on broad-band wireless com-
puting, communication and applications bwcca 2017 lecture notes
on data engineering and communications technologies, vol 12.
Q#20: "Yeah, I think that it will be more helpful dur-
Springer, Cham. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/9 78-3-3 19-6 9811-3_7 6
ing COVID because, with reminiscence therapy, car- 9. Akhter R, Sun W (2022) Exploration of the impact of COVID-19
egivers can potentially be putting material together on dementia care in long-term care facilities. Ann Longterm Care.
from the comfort of their own home and then being https://d oi.o rg/1 0.2 5270/a ltc.2 022.0 3.0 01
10. Lai CC, Wang JH, Ko WC et al (2020) COVID-19 in long-term
able to use it anywhere else. Once the material is put
care facilities: an upcoming threat that cannot be ignored. J Micro-
together, the staff members, either in a long-term care biol Immunol Infect 53:444–446
setting or on our current unit, would be able to provide 11. Flint AJ, Bingham KS, Iaboni A (2020) Effect of COVID-19 on
the support in a socially distanced manner."- [SW1] the mental health care of older people in Canada. Int Psychogeri-
atr 32:1113–1116
12. Ferm U, Ekström A, Larsson E et al (2021) Tablet computer-
supported conversation between people with dementia and their
carers: technology as interactional focus. Univ Access Inf Soc
Funding This research did not receive a specific grant from any gov- 20:753–765
ernmental, private or non-profit organizations. 13. Moon S, Park K (2020) The effect of digital reminiscence ther-
apy on people with dementia: a pilot randomized controlled trial.
Declarations BMC Geriatr 20:166
14. Ge S, Zhu Z, Wu B et al (2018) Technology-based cognitive train-
Conflict of interest There is no conflict of interest, according to the ing and rehabilitation interventions for individuals with mild cog-
authors. nitive impairment: a systematic review. BMC Geriatr 18:213
15. Graham ID, Logan J, Harrison MB et al (2006) Lost in knowledge
Research involving human participants and/or animals This study translation: time for a map? J Contin Educ Health Prof 26:13–24
obtained Ontario Tech University and Ontario Shores Research Ethics 16. Sun W, Horsburgh S, Quevedo A et al (2020) Advancing remi-
Board Approval. niscence therapy through virtual reality application to promote
social connectedness of persons with dementia. Gerontechnology
Informed consent All participants provided informed written consent 19:1–1. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.4 017/g t.2 020.1 9.s.7 0041
prior to their participation. 17. Braun V, Clarke V (2006) Using thematic analysis in psychology.
Qual Res Psychol 3:77–101
18. Lamberg SI (2008) Paperless or less paper: realistic goals in der-
matology practice. Semin Cutan Med Surg 27:86–88
References 19. Haikio K, Sagbakken M, Rugkasa J (2020) Family carers’ involve-
ment strategies in response to sub-optimal health services to older
adults living with dementia - a qualitative study. BMC Geriatr
1. Abraha I, Rimland JM, Trotta FM et al (2017) Systematic review
20:290
of systematic reviews of non-pharmacological interventions to
20. Webster J (2011) Improving care for people with dementia in
treat behavioural disturbances in older patients with dementia.
acute hospital: the role of person-centred assessment. Qual Age-
SENATOR-OnTop Ser BMJ Open 7:e012759
ing Older Adults 12:86–94
2. Manabe Y, Kosaka K (2017) Behavioral and psychological
21. Terada S, Oshima E, Yokota O et al (2013) Person-centered care
symptoms of dementia. Dementia with lewy bodies: clinical and
and quality of life of patients with dementia in long-term care
biological aspects. Springer, Japan, pp 87–92. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.
facilities. Psychiatry Res 205:103–108
1007/9 78-4-4 31-5 5948-1_7
22. Samuelsson C, Ekstrom A (2019) Digital communication support
3. Tible OP, Riese F, Savaskan E et al (2017) Best practice in the
in interaction involving people with dementia. Logoped Phoniatr
management of behavioural and psychological symptoms of
Vocol 44:41–50
dementia. Ther Adv Neurol Disord 10:297–309
23. Rehm IC, Music S, Carlsson A et al (2016) Integrating web-based
4. Woods B, O’Philbin L, Farrell EM et al (2018) Reminiscence
applications into aged care: two case studies and discussion. J Clin
therapy for dementia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD001120
Psychol Med Settings 23:285–297
5. Lazar A, Thompson H, Demiris G (2014) A systematic review
24. Alotaibi YK, Federico F (2017) The impact of health information
of the use of technology for reminiscence therapy. Health Educ
technology on patient safety. Saudi Med J 38:1173–1180
Behav 41:51S-61S
6. Lampit A, Hallock H, Suo C et al (2015) Cognitive training- Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
induced short-term functional and long-term structural plastic
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
change is related to gains in global cognition in healthy older
adults: a pilot study. Front Aging Neurosci 7:14
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds
7. Bonnechere B, Klass M, Langley C et al (2021) Brain training
exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the
using cognitive apps can improve cognitive performance and pro-
author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted
cessing speed in older adults. Sci Rep 11:12313
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of
8. Uchiya T, Nishimura R, Hirano T et al (2018) Design of reminis-
such publishing agreement and applicable law.
cence therapy system for elderly people with dementia. In: Barolli
1 3