personal view
Education and clinical decision support an extremely dangerous pathogen. There
can be multiple challenges including slug-
for healthcare professionals on gish health systems that do not respond
quickly enough and the difficulties in
getting healthcare professionals to think
emergency preparedness for extremely
about these diseases when there are so
many other priorities, and such a large
dangerous pathogens: report of a
volume of evidence that they have to keep
up with. The evidence base is sometimes
conference workshop
not helpful—because it is too academic
and not practical, or too general and not
applicable to individual situations, or too
Kieran Walsh,1 N Seyidov,2 M Wroczynski,3 G Payne,4 rigid and unable to be modified in light of
L Bhagavatheeswaran5 population needs or patient preferences.
The other difficulty is lack of resources—
mainly in logistics or personnel. Difficul- AbstrAct thE workshop
ties vary from country to country and also
Clinical decision support and e-l earning will The workshop was presented at the 2019
depending on the disease in question.
be essential if we are to achieve the goal of Biological Weapons Convention Meet-
preventing outbreaks of infectious diseases ings of Experts at the United Nations in
caused by extremely dangerous pathogens. Geneva on 7 August 2019. The purpose
challenge of engaging doctors in
However, these resources on their own will not of the workshop was to seek the views of
emergency preparedness
be enough to achieve this outcome. To achieve professionals from different sectors and
It can be a challenge to get doctors to
this outcome, resources must be integrated different countries on e-l earning and clin-
learn about pandemic infectious diseases
into undergraduate and postgraduate educa- ical decision support resources as means
and so to build emergency preparedness.
tional curricula, accredited as part of contin- of educating healthcare professionals in Such topics should be covered more in
uous professional development programmes, extremely dangerous pathogens, building
curricula—both undergraduate curricula
built around the knowledge and skills gaps capacity and strengthening health systems. in medical schools and postgraduate
of learners and developed using an evidence- The workshop comprised 35 delegates
curricula in primary or secondary care
based methodology that will enable healthcare with an interest in this subject. The dele-
training institutions. It is likely that
professionals to put their learning into action gates were from Europe, North America,
national public health bodies could do
for the benefit of both patients and popula- the Middle East, Asia and the Caucasus. more; however, it is also down to indi-
tions. This article describes and contextualises They represented different sectors
vidual senior professionals to spend more
the personal views discussed at a workshop including clinical medicine, infectious
time passing their knowledge and experi-
on education and clinical decision support disease epidemiology, public and popula-
ence onto their juniors.
for healthcare professionals reacting to an tion health, laboratory medicine, military
infectious disease outbreak from extremely medicine and international diplomacy.
dangerous pathogens. BMJ’s resources in infectious diseases knowledge gaps of healthcare
were discussed at the workshop. These
professionals
include BMJ Learning—an online
There are considerable knowledge gaps
multimedia learning platform—and
among healthcare professionals in the field
IntroductIon BMJ Best Practice—a clinical decision of dangerous infectious diseases.4 Lack of
Clinical decision support and e-l earning for support tool.1 2 Both resources can be
knowledge of extremely dangerous patho-
healthcare professionals will be essential if used to help doctors and other health-
gens is serious as it could result in failure
we are to achieve the goal of preventing care professionals to recognise, report
to recognise, report or refer affected
outbreaks of infectious diseases caused and refer patients with serious infectious
patients. There is also a skills gap—for
by extremely dangerous pathogens. This diseases. The purpose of the resources is
example, procedural skills in maintaining
article describes and contextualises the ‘capacity-b uilding for detecting, reporting
strict infection control and in donning
themes and personal views discussed at a and responding to outbreaks of infec-
and doffing personal protective equip-
workshop on education and clinical deci- tious disease’—‘including in the areas of
ment. This is in keeping with our own
sion support for healthcare professionals preparedness, response, and crisis manage- data from BMJ Learning which shows
reacting to an infectious disease outbreak ment and mitigation’3 Both resources have
that healthcare professionals were only
from extremely dangerous pathogens. been made available to healthcare profes-
able to correctly answer one in three ques-
sionals, translated into relevant languages,
tions on the basics of personal protective
accredited for the purposes of continuous
equipment. The skills deficit is serious as
1BMJ, BMA House, London, UK professional development and integrated
it could result in healthcare professionals
2Department for Health Policy and Planning, Public into relevant postgraduate curricula.
themselves becoming infected—with
Health and Reform Center, Ministry of Health, Baku,
Azerbaijan short- term and long- term implications
3Strategic Partnerships, Global Health and Global thEmEs for individuals and the healthcare system.
Health Security, BMJ, London, UK Evidence-based response in the event of Such professionals could also pass on
4Global Health, BMJ, London, UK
5Global Health and Global Health Security, BMJ, an outbreak of infectious disease infectious diseases—and they could be
London, UK It can be difficult to mount an evidence- very dangerous spreaders—as they see
based response in the event of an lots of people who will be vulnerable to
correspondence to Dr Kieran Walsh, BMJ, BMA
House, London WC1H 9JR, UK; kmwalsh@ bmj. com outbreak of infectious disease caused by infection.
Walsh K, et al. BMJ Mil Health April 2020 Vol 166 No 2 103
Protected
by
copyright,
including
for
uses
related
to
text
and
data
mining,
AI
training,
and
similar
technologies.
Medical
library.
BMJ
Mil
Health:
first
published
as
10.1136/jramc-2019-001328
on
20
February
2020.
Downloaded
from
http://militaryhealth.bmj.com/
on
March
13,
2026
at
University
of
Oulu
personal view
resources that healthcare professionals professionals will only be engaged if the helped to interpret the outcomes of the workshop. All
will need and use education on extremely dangerous patho- authors attended and contributed to the workshop.
All authors revised the work critically for important Healthcare professionals need a variety of gens fits within the framework of medical
intellectual content and approved the final version to
different types of resources on extremely education in their country. In effect, this be published.
dangerous pathogens. In some cases, the will mean learning resources that are
Funding The authors have not declared a specific
healthcare professional will know the accredited for the purpose of continuous grant for this research from any funding agency in the
diagnosis—for example, that a patient professional development by the relevant public, commercial or not-f or- profit sectors.
has anthrax and so will use clinical deci- regulatory authority in country. Similarly,
competing interests KW works for BMJ Learning
sion support to find the answer to specific although authorities agree on ‘the need and BMJ Best Practice which produce a range of
questions on management or prognosis to promote interagency coordination and resources in infectious and non-i nfectious diseases.
of anthrax. But sometimes the healthcare multisectoral cooperation to prepare for, patient consent for publication Not required.
professional will not know the underlying detect and respond to infectious disease
provenance and peer review Not commissioned;
diagnosis and so will need to enter clin- outbreaks whether natural, accidental or internally peer reviewed.
ical symptoms and signs into the resource deliberate in nature’, true cooperation and
© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. No commercial
and be confident that they will get an coordination will only be operationalised re- use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.
answer that they can rely on. BMJ Best through partnerships with key stake-
Practice covers both use cases—where holders in countries that are most at risk.3
the diagnosis is known and not known.5 The sectors and agencies involved must
Features of the resources that healthcare include those from the medical education to cite Walsh K, Seyidov N, Wroczynski M, et al.
BMJ Mil Health 2020;166:103–104.
professionals most appreciated included: and healthcare improvement fields.
Received 10 September 2019
the practical rather than academic focus
Revised 26 October 2019
of the resources; the accessibility of the conclusIons Accepted 3 November 2019
resources—for example, on a desktop or a Clinical decision support and e-l earning Published Online First 20 February 2020
mobile app (both online and offline); and will be essential if we are to achieve the BMJ Mil Health 2020;166:103–104.
the amount of time needed for the health- goal of preventing outbreaks of infectious doi:10.1136/jramc-2019-001328
care professional to get an answer (ideally
diseases caused by extremely dangerous
measured in seconds). pathogens. However, these resources on RefeRences
their own will not be enough to achieve 1 Kwag KH, González- Lorenzo M, Banzi R, et al. Providing
bridging the gap between rhetoric and this outcome. Resources must be integrated doctors with high- quality information: an updated
evaluation of web- based point- of- care information
reality in emergency preparedness into educational curricula, accredited as
summaries. J Med Internet Res 2016;18:e15.
There can be a considerable gap between part of continuous professional devel- 2 Walsh K, Sandars J, Kapoor SS, et al. Getting NICE
rhetoric and reality in education on opment programmes, built around the guidelines into practice: can e-learning help? Clin Gov
extremely dangerous pathogens and in knowledge gaps of learners and developed 2010;15:6–11.
how online education and clinical decision using an evidence-b ased methodology that 3 Biological Weapons Convention. Article VII. Available:
https://b wc1972. org/h ome/ the-b iological- weapons- support resources can bridge that gap. will enable healthcare professionals to put
convention/a rticle- vii/
For example, authorities might state the their learning into action for the benefit of 4 Walsh K. E- Learning modules in new and emerging
need for ‘capacity- building for detecting, both patients and populations. infectious diseases improve the applied knowledge
reporting and responding to outbreaks of and problem- solving skills of healthcare professional
infectious disease or biological weapons Acknowledgements We are grateful to all those learners. Bmj Stel 2019;5:229–31.
5 Campbell JM, Umapathysivam K, Xue Y, et al. Evidence- attacks’ but this will be impossible without who attended and contributed to the workshop.
Based practice point- of- care resources: a quantitative
engaging front- line healthcare profes- contributors KW wrote the first draft. All authors evaluation of quality, rigor, and content. Worldviews
sionals.3 And the front- line healthcare contributed to the design of the workshop and Evid Based Nurs 2015;12:313–27.
104 Walsh K, et al. BMJ Mil Health April 2020 Vol 166 No 2
Protected
by
copyright,
including
for
uses
related
to
text
and
data
mining,
AI
training,
and
similar
technologies.
Medical
library.
BMJ
Mil
Health:
first
published
as
10.1136/jramc-2019-001328
on
20
February
2020.
Downloaded
from
http://militaryhealth.bmj.com/
on
March
13,
2026
at
University
of
Oulu