1964 Scientific Abstracts
References: Education, Medical Strategy, Voorhees, United States of America; 3RMEI
[1] Argent R, Patient Involvement With Home-Based Exercise Programs: Can Medical Education, Educational Strategy, Voorhees, United States of America
Connected Health Interventions Influence Adherence? JMIR Mhealth
Background: Beginning in 2016, RMEI created multiple accredited online education
Uhealth 2018.
focused on RA and designed for rheumatologists. In 2018, the educational scope
[2] Lamb SE, Strengthening and Stretching for Rheumatoid Arthritis of the Hand
expanded to include live meetings, starting with a symposium at EULAR. For all
Trial (SARAH).Lancet. 2015,385(9966).
programming from 2016-18 (6 courses, in both live and online settings), educational
[3] Azevedo R, Smartphone application for rheumatoid arthritis self-manage- content was developed based on performance data from the previous RA courses.
ment: cross-sectional study revealed the usefulness, willingness to use and
During the 2019 EULAR symposium, we presented the outcomes findings - from both
patients’ needs.Rheumatol Int.2015, 35(10).
the 2018 symposium and online courses – to the assembled rheumatologists, iden-
Disclosure of Interests: None declared
tifying ongoing educational gaps observed in their specialty population. The ration-
DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2020-eular.5496
ale: to create continuity between symposia over time by demonstrating incremental
improvements and continuing areas of need, while also endowing learners with a
AB1352-HPR SHARED CARE – AN ALTERNATIVE WAY TO COPE greater sense of ownership and investment in forthcoming educational content.
WITH INCREASING SERVICE DEMAND Objectives: To evaluate the impact of presenting learner’s educational perfor-
mance data to them before education addressing persistent gaps identified in
C. Yin Shuen1, N. Woon Leung2, L. Man Chi2, L. Chi Kwai2, C. Ching Man2, S.
their performance the year prior.
P. Kong2, L. Pik Fan2, C. L. Leung2. 1United Christian Hospital, Medicine and Methods: Data collected during the 2018 EULAR symposium was analyzed to
Geriatric, Hong Kong, Hong Kong (SAR); 1United Christian Hospital, Medicine
understand the underlying drivers impacting poor performance in an identified and Geriatric, Hong Kong, Hong Kong (SAR)
area of ongoing educational need (cycling versus switching TNF inhibitors). A lin-
Background: Rheumatic diseases are immune-mediated disorders that affect ear regression model was run including all non-related curriculum, demographic,
the musculoskeletal system, soft tissues, blood vessels and connective tissue. and evaluation questions as possible drivers against those related low-scoring (at
Patients with rheumatic diseases need regular follow up for disease and drug Post-Test) curriculum questions. The content of RMEI’s 2019 symposium at EULAR
toxicity monitoring. To cope with the increasing service demand, the Division was developed to address the identified significant drivers to improve population
of Rheumatology in the United Christian Hospital developed and expanded the proficiency in cycling versus switching. In addition to developing content based on
shared care service. In the conventional practice, patients have to been seen by the above findings, that data was also presented to learners in poster format prior
rheumatologist for every visit while the shared care service involved follow up by to their participation in the 2019 symposium. During the period between on-site reg-
rheumatologist and rheumatology nurse in alternate sessions. istration and the start of the symposium, attendees had the opportunity to explore
Objectives: data-driven insights, via audio-guided posters located around the meeting room.
1.To evaluate the effectiveness and safety of the shared cared service These insights included discussion of 2018 data analysis, identified drivers of poor
2To evaluate the effectiveness of reduction in workload of rheumatology clinic performance, introduced the iterative data-driven methodology employed, and
Methods: This is a retrospective study involving the period from 1/1/2019 to rationale behind content development for the 2019 symposium. At the conclusion
31/12/2019. Patients who attended the rheumatology nurse clinic for shared care of the 2019 symposium learners were asked to describe the impact/relevance of
being presented with their performance data, their intention of incorporating course
were recruited and reviewed. All patients were selected and referred by rheu-
content into practice, and what specifically they intended to change. matologists. Criteria for shared care included regular follow up in rheumatology
Results: Data was collected on 135 clinicians (primarily physicians who actively
clinic and stable clinical condition. The length of follow up is adjusted according to treat patients with rheumatoid arthritis) who attended, and participated in, the
patient condition. Services provided by rheumatology nurse (RhN) included dis- symposium. With specific regard to the impact of seeing their own data presented
ease education, drug and disease monitoring, drug advice and referral to other
back to them, 80% reported that seeing the learner data from the 2018 sympo-
professionals and community service as indicated. During each visit, patient’s
sium enhanced their current learning experience. Further, 86% reported that they
vital signs, disease activity and laboratory results were assessed according to
intended to incorporate course content into their clinical practice. Specifically, this
standard protocol. RhN will make discharge record to ensure continuity of care.
population reported an intent to change their treatment approach and patient
Results: Totally 489 episodes of attendance to nurse led clinic were recruited.
education practices.
Majority (97.3%) were arthritis patients. Others included lupus, vasculitis,
Conclusion: Education is only as effective as the degree to which the audience Sjogren’s syndrome and miscellaneous conditions. The length of follow up ranged
is engaged. While year over year data from 2016 through 2018 demonstrated
from 3 weeks to 24 weeks and most of the patients were follow up between 8
that an iterative approach facilitated the meaningful and necessary reinforcement
to 16 weeks. Shared care patients included those with stable disease for inter-
of challenging concepts, learners in prior years were not aware of the method-
val monitoring, and patients for drug initiation and titration. The ratio for disease
ological underpinnings of the educational offerings. Presenting this population
monitoring and drug monitoring are 41.3% and 58.7% respectively.
with findings derived from their performance - as a rationale for the education For the 489 episodes of attendance, 10 (2%) episodes needed rheumatologist inter-
they were about to participate in proved a compelling motivator for active learner
vention and 8 (1.6%) cases need advancement of follow up. Problems that required
engagement, and may have had a positive influence on the degree to which
doctor interventions and advance follow up mainly are suboptimal disease control
learners implemented course content into their clinical practice.
requiring medication adjustment or musculoskeletal ultrasound investigation.
Disclosure of Interests: None declared
178 (36.4%) episodes of nursing intervention were delivered, majority were med-
DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2020-eular.4748
ication advice (133, 27.2%). Reasons for nursing intervention included adverse
drug reaction, abnormal investigation results, poor drug adherence and disease
flare up. There were no emergency department attendance or admission related AB1354-HPR CURRENT SITUATION OF TRAINING IN
RHEUMATOLOGY IN THE POSTGRADUATE
to rheumatic problems within one month of RhN follow up.
CURRICULUMS OF INTERNAL MEDICINE, FAMILY
Conclusion: The shared care service is smooth and can safely lengthen the
MEDICINE, GERIATRICS, PAIN MEDICINE AND,
follow-up intervals to reduce clinic visit burden in rheumatology clinic. RhN input
PHYSICAL AND REHABILITATION MEDICINE ACROSS
also allowed prompt advice for steroid tapering and dose titration for disease
COLOMBIA
specific medication for better disease control. Proper case selection and close
collaboration between rheumatologist and rheumatology nurse is the key. D. G. Fernández-Ávila1, L. Patino2, J. Gutiérrez2. 1Pontificia Universidad
Disclosure of Interests: None declared Javeriana – Hospital Universitario San Ignacio., Bogotá, Colombia; 2Pontificia
DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2020-eular.4381 Universidad Javeriana – Hospital Universitario San Ignacio, Bogotá, Colombia
Background: Rheumatic diseases are an important complaint in patients,
although the incidence is low, they cause disability and impact on the health
HPR Professional education, training and
system. Currently, in Colombia, there are 198 rheumatologist, so it’s important to
competencies know how is rheumatology training in specialties related to rheumatology, which
are the specialties that the patient with a suspected rheumatic disease will visit
at first.
AB1353-HPR EMPOWERING LEARNERS TO “OWN” THEIR
Objectives: To describe the training status in rheumatology in the postgraduate
PERFORMANCE: PRESENTING EDUCATIONAL
curriculums of internal medicine, family medicine, geriatrics, pain medicine and,
PERFORMANCE DATA BACK TO LEARNERS
physical and rehabilitation medicine across Colombia.
AS A COMPONENT OF AND RATIONALE FOR
Methods: This is a descriptive cross-sectional study. A survey was applied in
SUBSEQUENT EDUCATION
each participating medical school using the RedCap® platform. The question-
E. Johnson1, L. Eldasher2, D. Clausen3. 1RMEI Medical Education, Outcomes naire included multiple-choice responses and a textbox to complete. The survey
& Analytics, Voorhees Township, United States of America; 2RMEI Medical was done to the 29 registered medical schools which offer the specializations
Protected
by
copyright,
including
for
uses
related
to
text
and
data
mining,
AI
training,
and
similar
technologies.
library
Ann
Rheum
Dis:
first
published
as
10.1136/annrheumdis-2020-eular.6490
on
13
June
2020.
Downloaded
from
http://ard.bmj.com/
on
March
13,
2026
at
University
of
Oulu
Medical
Scientific Abstracts 1965
already mentioned. The program director or an assistant professor was asked matched 80% of them. The average time of baseline exploration was 45,2 ±3,8 minutes
to fill the survey out between April 2019 and January 2020. The sample was and the final time was 32,6 ± 3,5, improving the 5 students in an average of 12,6± 4,4 min-
described through means and standard deviations or frequency and percentages utes. The technical aspects not performed correctly in the baseline ultrasound examination
according to the type of variable. were the bilateral comparative, centred image, grey scale gain, measuring, correct ana-
Results: Data was obtained from all the programs of specialization in internal medi- tomical image of the synovial recess of the wrist and position-width-depth of the Doppler
cine (n = 29), family medicine (n= 9), pain medicine (n= 8), physical and rehabilitation box. An improvement was observed at 18 months in the unequivocal identification of the
medicine (n= 6), geriatrics (n= 4). All the programs of internal medicine, geriatrics, and patient, adequate illumination of the consultation, bilateral comparison, correct anatomical
physical/rehabilitation medicine have rheumatology as a mandatory subject within the acquisition of synovial recesses and the quantification of GS synovitis, but no statistically
curriculum, while in family medicine and pain medicine programs: 33% (n= 3), and 57% significant differences were observed, before and after the teaching intervention, in possible
(n= 4) respectively, does not have a rheumatology training. In internal medicine the relation with the difficulty to use the ultrasound in their respective Rheumatology Units in
average duration of rheumatology training is 56 days (28 to 90 days), in geriatrics, it clinical practice, but mainly because the aspects correctly performed in the baseline explo-
is 56 days (45-60 days), in family medicine 26.1 days (3 to 30), in medicine physical ration were numerous.
and rehabilitation medicine 35 days (30 to 60) and in pain medicine 40 days (30 to 60). Conclusion: A formal training of rheumatology nurses in musculoskeletal ultra-
93.8% (n= 45) of the programs surveyed have a rheumatologist as a teacher in charge sound (MSUS) could be very useful, and cost-efficient, in the health care of patients
of both, the academic activities and the external rheumatology consultation and in the with rheumatoid arthritis.
rest of the programs these activities are done by an specialist in internal medicine, fam- Disclosure of Interests: None declared
ily medicine or pain medicine. The theoretical components most frequently offered in DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2020-eular.4732
seminars or master classes are: rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, vasculitis, spondyloarthritis,
gout, osteoarthritis, sjogren’s syndrome and osteoporosis. The specialization programs AB1356-HPR GOUT IN SPANISH PRIMARY HEALHCARE CENTERS:
have an average of 3 rheumatologists as professors (range 1 to 8). 43.8% of the pro- STILL A LONG WAY TO GO
grams use some virtual resources to complement the teaching in rheumatology such as
video conferencing in virtual platform or YouTube (8.3%), online course (6.3%), mobile M. A. Pou1, S. Jeria2, A. Prada-Ojeda3, S. Ferrer1, A. García-Guillén2,
application (16.7%), others such as moodle and webcast platform (12.5%). 92.9% (n H. Corominas2, C. Diaz Torne2. 1EAP Encants, Barcelona, Spain; 2Hospital de la
= 52) offer their students an elective rotation in the rheumatology service, in addition Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Rheumatology, Barcelona, Spain; 3Hospital de Torrejon,
to the mandatory one. Finally, 89.6% (n = 43) of the interviewees agree with the way Madrid, Spain
in which the curriculum is structured in their programs, to approach initial diagnostic Background: Gout has a prevalence >2.5% in the Spanish adult population. It is
and therapeutic in patients with suspected or established rheumatic disease. However, a chronic disease that without proper treatment causes pain, joint deformity and
23.2% (n = 13) of the professors of the surveyed programs (6 of internal medicine, 4 of increased cardiovascular risk and mortality. Recent advances have demonstrated
family medicine, 2 of pain medicine and 1 of physical/rehabilitation medicine), consider that if correctly treated the disease can be controlled and even ‘cured.’ Most gouty
that the rheumatology subject should not be mandatory within their programs. patients are diagnosed and treated by general practitioners (GPs). There is evidence
Conclusion: All physicians need to be familiar with rheumatological conditions that the management if these patients is not good neither at Rheumatology Units nor
since the rate of rheumatologists in Colombia is low. Knowing rheumatology is at Primary Healthcare (PHC) centers.Several causes of this mismanagement can be
an increasingly important role in a clinical scenario in many postgraduate curric- found in the literature.
ulums as we explain in this study. Objectives: Design and evaluation of the results of a questionnaire created from a
References: bibliographic search focused on areas of improvement of gout management in PHC.
[1] Sivera F, et al; Working Group on Training in Rheumatology across Europe. Methods: A search was made in Pubmed to identify the main barriers described in
Differences and similarities in rheumatology specialty training programmes the management of patients with gout in primary care. The terms used were: “Gout”,
across European countries. Ann Rheum Dis. 2015 Jun;74(6):1183-7 “primary healthcare” and “education”. A Google Form of gout knowledge and man-
Disclosure of Interests: None declared agement questionnaire was designed, taking into account what is described in the
DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2020-eular.6490 literature. The Google Form was sent to all GP from an urban area via mail and to
other contacts via WhatsApp and twitter.
AB1355-HPR THE IMPACT OF A STRUCTURED TRAINING Results: Responses were obtained from 224 GPs; 69.5% were women; 73.1%
PROGRAMME FOR THE DETECTION OF SYNOVITIS had between 11 and 30 years of professional experience; 96.4% answered that
WITH MUSCULOSKELETAL ULTRASOUND (MSUS) IN gouty are mostly controlled in primary care; 99.6% performs the diagnosis of gout
RHEUMATOLOGY NURSING without analysis of synovial fluid and 17% diagnosed only by clinics without urate
levels; 55.9% of GPs do not use any reference guide. Of those who use, the 73%
L. Cano Garcia1, C. Dominguez2, S. Garcia Diaz3, R. Segura4, J. M. Martín Martín5,
use GUIPCLINGOT and 40% use SEMGs one; 80.5% have not done any gout
F. G. Jiménez-Núñez1on behalf of OPEN REUMA. 1Instituto de Investigación
course in the last 5 years; 26% did not have access to a rheumatologist to confirm
Biomédica de Málaga (IBIMA), Hospital Regional Universitario de Málaga, Málaga, the gout diagnosis; only 30.8% knew the therapeutic objective of the urate lowering
Spain; 2Hospital Virgen Macarena, Sevilla, Spain; 3Hospital Moisés Broggi, Sant
therapy (ULT); 28.6% considered the beginning of ULT after the first attack; 62%
Joan Despi, CSI, Barcelona, Spain; 4Hospital Reina Sofía, Córdoba, Spain; 5Hospital
believed that the most important part of the treatment was changing diet and life-
Universitario Nuestra Señora de la Candelaria, Tenerife, Spain
styles; 88.8% did not perform any specific education for these patients by the nurse;
Background: just 37.2% carried out a treat-to-target strategy to lower urate levels.
Objectives: To analyse the effect of a teaching intervention for the technical per- Conclusion: The questionnaire identifies multiple points of improvement for the
formance of a reduced index of ultrasound synovitis by nurses without previous management of this pathology in accordance with the described in the literature.
experience in musculoskeletal ultrasound (MSUS). Most GPs are unaware of the therapeutic objective of the ULT.
Methods: Design: Quasi-experimental study of the before-after type. Protocol: The Disclosure of Interests: None declared
nurses received a theoretical-practical, face-to-face and intensive training of 8 hours, DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2020-eular.3117
by an expert rheumatologist in musculoskeletal ultrasound (MSUS), to perform the
Perricone index, which assesses the presence of grey-scale synovitis (GS) and quan- AB1357-HPR DESIGNING THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF NURSING
tifies the presence of a power-doppler (PD) signal semiquantitatively (0-3), in 6 joints COMPETENCY FRAMEWORK FOR RHEUMATOLOGY
(Wrists, 2nd Metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints and knees). The theoretical knowl- NURSES
edge acquired was assessed by an exam test type at the end of the training, and the
P. Livermore1, D. Finney1, J. Begum1, R. Wyllie1, T. Cornell1, H. Smith1,
technical skills were assessed by an ultrasound examination in patients with rheuma-
L. Howie1, L. Parker1on behalf of Royal College of Nursing Rheumatology
toid arthritis, immediately after the teaching session and at 18 months later. Variables:
Nurse Forum Competency working party. 1Royal College of Nursing, London,
Illumination of the consultation, protection of privacy and unequivocal identification of United Kingdom
the patient, technique (explorer ergonomics, bilateral comparison, use of both hands,
measurement, marking and saving data), GS (probe position, centred image, corti- Background: The 1st Edition of the RCN Competency Framework for Rheu-
cal-cartilage-tendon display, depth, focus, frequency, gain), PD (probe pressure, PRF, matology Nurse Specialists (RNS) will be published in March 2020. The role of
position-width-depth of the box, focus, frequency, gain), synovial recesses (dorsal and the RNS is complex, and can include caring for children and young people. The
palmar examination of the wrist, 2nd Metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints and supra importance of RNS’s was highlighted by the National Rheumatoid Arthritis Society
and parapatellar medial and lateral examination of the knees) and semi-quantitative (NRAS 2017). The British Society for Rheumatology (BSR) outlined the need for
gradation of synovitis in GS and PD. Statistical analysis: descriptive analysis, and in education, training supervision and work force development. Education for RNS
relation to the statistical significance tests for paired variables (pre and post teaching isn’t currently centralized but is key to improving skills and developing workforce
intervention) the McNemar test was used for dichotomous qualitative variables and for the future. RNS are in short supply resulting in problems of access to services
McNemar-Bowker test for those of more than two categories. and delays in care (BSR 2019). In all 4 UK nations the titles of RNS and proficiency
Results: 5 nurses, 80% women, aged between 36 and 54 years participated. They vary greatly (Titrate trial 2019) This is likely to have an impact on patient experience
adequately answered 100% of the 4-student test questions, and the remaining one and outcomes. The European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) developed
Protected
by
copyright,
including
for
uses
related
to
text
and
data
mining,
AI
training,
and
similar
technologies.
library
Ann
Rheum
Dis:
first
published
as
10.1136/annrheumdis-2020-eular.6490
on
13
June
2020.
Downloaded
from
http://ard.bmj.com/
on
March
13,
2026
at
University
of
Oulu
Medical