Neurological Sciences (2023) 44:45–58
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-022-06402-3
REVIEW ARTICLE
Unmet needs and gaps in the identification of secondary progression
in multiple sclerosis: a Southern Italy healthcare professionals’
perspective
Giacomo Lus1 · Marco André Bassano2 · Vincenzo Brescia Morra3 · Simona Bonavita4 · Antonio Gallo4 ·
Davide Maimone5 · Laura Malerba2 · Giorgia Teresa Maniscalco6 · Francesco Saccà3 · Giuseppe Salemi7 ·
Renato Turrini2 · Salvatore Cottone8 · Edoardo Sessa9 · Maria Buccafusca10 · Luigi Maria Edoardo Grimaldi11
Received: 8 June 2022 / Accepted: 9 September 2022 / Published online: 17 September 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
Objective Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic disease with different clinical courses and a tendency to worsening. The
relapsing–remitting MS presents acute onset and relapses of neurological symptoms, followed by their remission. This form
can convert to secondary progressive MS (SPMS) with irreversible neurological worsening and disability. The identification
of signs, symptoms, markers of progression, and strategies to manage MS patients is mandatory to allow early identification
of those at higher risk of conversion to SPMS, for prompt intervention to cope with the progression of the disease.
Methods A panel of Italian experts from Southern Italy have reviewed the current knowledge on MS and its management
and identified the crucial tools for SPMS recognition.
Results More effective communication between patients and clinicians should be established, with the support of digital
tools. Moreover, the improvement in the clinical use of biomarkers for progression (cellular structures and tissue organiza-
tion, such as neurofilaments and chitinase 3-like 1, axonal and neurons density) and of instrumental analyses for recognition
of whole-brain atrophy, chronic active lesions, spinal cord lesions and atrophy, and the improvement the combination of the
Expanded Disability Status Scale and the evaluation of cognitive dysfunction are discussed.
Conclusion Given the availability of a pharmacological option, adequate education both for patients, regarding the evolu-
tion of the disease and the specific treatment, and for professionals, to allow more effective and sensitive communication
and the best use of diagnostic and management tools, could represent a strategy to improve patient management and their
quality of life.
Keywords Multiple sclerosis · Secondary progressive multiple sclerosis (SPMS) · Biomarkers · Diagnosis · Italy · Expert
opinion
* Laura Malerba 6 Multiple Sclerosis Center, “A. Cardarelli” Hospital, Naples,
laura.malerba@novartis.com Italy
7 UOC of Neurology and Multiple Sclerosis Center, DAI
1 Department of Advanced Medical and Surgical Sciences, II
of Diagnostic and Interventistic Radiology and Stroke, AOIP
Division of Neurology, Multiple Sclerosis Center, University
“P. Giaccone”, Palermo, Italy
of Campania “L. Vanvitelli”, Naples, Italy
8 Neurology and Stroke Unit, Multiple Sclerosis Center,
2 Novartis Farma S.P.A, Origgio, VA, Italy
ARNAS CIVICO, Palermo, Italy
3 Department of Neurosciences Reproductive Sciences 9 IRCCS Centro Neurolesi “Bonino-Pulejo”, Messina, Italy
and Odontostomatology, Multiple Sclerosis Center, Federico
II University, Naples, Italy 10 Neurology and Neuromuscular Unit, Multiple Sclerosis
Centre, “G. Martino” University Hospital, Messina, Italy
4 Department of Advanced Medical and Surgical Sciences,
Università Della Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy 11 Neurology and Multiple Sclerosis Center, Unità Operativa
Complessa (UOC), Foundation Institute “G. Giglio”, Cefalù,
5 Unità Operativa Complessa Neurology, Multiple Sclerosis
PA, Italy
Center, ARNAS Garibaldi, Catania, Italy
Vol.:(0112 33456789)
46 Neurological Sciences (2023) 44:45–58
Introduction the absence of specific symptoms indicating the progression
[17], and (iii) the difficulties in reaching an effective interac-
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a highly heterogeneous chronic tion between the MS patient and the physician, often delaying
disease characterized by a continuum of disease pheno- the recognition of the transition phase. Indeed, due to the slow
types, with a tendency to worsening. It is estimated that and insidious progression of the transition phase to SPMS,
around 2.3 million people live with MS worldwide, with a the worsening is not always evident in terms of EDSS scores
higher prevalence in women [1]. The onset of MS is com- and can go unnoticed both by patients and HCPs. Progres-
mon in young adults, although pediatric and late-onset sion from RRMS towards SPMS can be masked by inflam-
disease also occurs [1]. matory processes, relapses, treatments, and compensatory
The different clinical courses have been classified mechanisms deserving the definition of “silent progression”
according to disease activity and disability progression [18]. Aging is another important risk factor for progression
[1, 2], which are evaluated with an objective scale, the that should be considered, especially in elderly patients and
Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) [3]. in those with a late onset of the disease.
In 85–90% of MS patients, the disease is characterized by All of the abovementioned factors and difficulties in iden-
acute onset and relapses of neurological symptoms, followed tifying early transition to SPMS contribute to the underesti-
by their remission, the so-called relapsing–remitting MS mation and delay of the diagnosis. Indeed, identification of
(RRMS) [4]. About 50–80% of patients experience conver- SPMS patients is mostly retrospective, thus leaving a long
sion from RRMS to the secondary progressive multiple scle- period of uncertainty [17, 19].
rosis form (SPMS) within 15–20 years from diagnosis [4]. In the present work, we review the current needs, gaps,
SPMS is characterized by irreversible worsening of neuro- and criticisms in SPMS and discuss the possible approaches
logical symptoms and disability, irrespective of relapses [5]. suggested by a panel of experts in Italy, to implement the
Despite the numerous disease-modifying treatments (DMT) effective identification and management of SPMS.
available for RRMS, the conversion to SPMS continues to be
a frequently observed phenomenon. Early identification of
RRMS patients at higher risk of conversion could allow the
SPMS therapies
clinicians a more effective use of the available DMT. How-
ever, there is a lack of simple and reliable tools in clinical
practice to allow the rapid identification of subjects at high The lack of a specific treatment for SPMS has been the main
risk of transition to SPMS [6]. Early and effective treatment critical point in disease management. The available RRMS
of RRMS may help to tackle the progression of MS, as dem- therapies may delay progression/conversion to SPMS by
onstrated by the study of Brown et al. on the effectiveness reducing brain damage, although evidence is conflicting [20].
of early (i.e., within 5 years of disease onset) treatment of The first DMT approved for the treatment of SPMS was mitox-
RRMS on conversion to SPMS [7]. antrone [21]. The efficacy of mitoxantrone is due to a broad
Identifying the right timing of the transition from mechanism of action, from decreasing the secretion of proin-
RRSM to SPMS is of pivotal importance for adequate flammatory cytokines to inhibition of macrophage-mediated
and timely treatment, given the availability of an effective myelin degradation [22]. This type 2 topoisomerase inhibitor
and safe drug for its active form, siponimod, which was acts on neuroinflammation and has been shown to reduce the
approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) number of relapses and time to first relapse and improve EDSS
in March 2019 [8] and by the European Medicines Agency and the ambulation index [21]. Its use is limited by unfavora-
(EMA) in January 2020 [9]. The accurate identification ble adverse effects, i.e., cardiotoxicity [23], hepatotoxicity, and
of disease status is critical because patients with SPMS hematologic malignancy [24]. Mitoxantrone remained the only
are also likely to require additional physical and cognitive FDA-approved drug for the treatment of SPMS until 2019.
rehabilitation and psychological treatment to cope with the Interferon-beta-1b is also approved for the treatment of
long-feared progression of the disease [10, 11]. SPMS, as a result of its antiviral, anti-inflammatory, anti-
Despite the well-characterized neuropathological features proliferative, and immunomodulatory activities, although
of SPMS (extensive and confluent demyelinating lesions a 10-year follow-up of the European trial testing and its
together with chronically active-expanding lesions throughout efficacy in SPMS patients did not convincingly support its
the brain and spinal cord [12, 13] and meningeal inflammation long-term use [25].
and white and gray matter atrophy [14]), the early recognition Different clinical trials have investigated the efficacy
of SPMS patients is a paramount challenge for healthcare pro- and safety of other approved MS treatments on progres-
fessionals (HCPs). This is due to the following: (i) the lack of sive MS. Clinical studies focusing on the efficacy of anti-
diagnostic tests, standardized protocols, and criteria to identify CD20 antibodies (rituximab and ocrelizumab) and S1P
the turning point leading from RRMS to SPMS [15, 16], (ii) receptor modulators (fingolimod and siponimod) enrolled
1 3
Neurological Sciences (2023) 44:45–58 47
primary progressive MS (PPMS) and SPMS patients. The reactions to the communication of progression vary
B-cell-depleting therapy with rituximab or ocrelizumab greatly across patients. In some cases, the patient realizes
showed some benefits for the treatment of young PPMS that the disease is slowly progressing even before the physi-
patients with inflammatory lesions, slowing disease pro- cian does. Indeed, a recent study demonstrated that patients
gression up to 120 weeks [26, 27]. Despite PPMS and realize SPMS conversion on average 2.7 years before the
SPMS sharing some pathophysiological features, benefits confirmation from the neurologist [37]. Some patients accept
from the treatment with rituximab and ocrelizumab have the progression, while others experience a denial phase
not yet been demonstrated in a representative SPMS pop- towards identifying SPMS [36], ignoring the availability of
ulation. As regards other RRMS-approved DMTs, fingoli- a specific treatment and fearing potential loss of motor func-
mod did not reduce disease progression in PPMS in the tion. Some patients may be reluctant to share information
INFORMS phase 3 clinical trial [28], while natalizumab related to worsening of symptoms because they fear there
failed to show an improvement based on the EDSS scale will be no chance of further treatment [36].
in SPMS patients in the ASCEND phase 3 trial [29]. To avoid anxiety, fear, and delay in the intervention,
The most encouraging results for the treatment of SPMS timely and sensitive communication between physicians
came from the EXPAND study, a phase 3 RCT investigat- and patients is paramount [36]. Technical terms related
ing the role of siponimod in delaying disability progres- to the pathology may generate confusion among patients,
sion. In this study, siponimod, a more selective modulator who should be able to express their concerns about their
of the S1P receptor than fingolimod, showed that interven- everyday life without hesitancy in discussing progression
tion reduced the relative risk of 3-month and 6-month con- issues [36]. The timing of information delivery should be
firmed disability progression (CPD) by 21% (p = 0.01321) and carefully considered by the physician; communication
26% (p = 0.0058), respectively [30]. Moreover, pre-defined soon after the diagnosis may imply a negative reaction
patient’s subgroup analysis of the primary endpoint (3-month by the patient, but postponing the topic would reduce the
CDP) indicated greater efficacy of siponimod in younger acceptance of the situation and might fail to engage the
patients, with lower EDSS and shorter disease duration (i.e., patient in the treatment positively.
baseline age of 20–30 years, EDSS score at baseline ≤ 5, and Communication of shifting into the progressive phase
duration of MS since first symptoms of 10 years — early should always be accompanied by the perspective of the
phase SPMS) [30]. The analysis of the secondary endpoint newly available treatments [36]. Defining the disease as
(6-month CDP) in the overall population and in specific sub- a continuum, more than as a sequence of phases, using
groups defined by relapse activity and disease progression patient-friendly language, might help to increase patient-
supported this finding [30]. Siponimod is now approved and physician trust, creating awareness towards the pathology
marketed for the therapy of SPMS with active disease as evi- and encouraging engagement in the treatment.
denced by relapses or imaging features of inflammatory activ- The ManTra (Managing the Transition to SPMS) study
ity. No DMTs have so far been approved for the treatment of was a mixed-method research project conducted in Italy
the inactive form of SPMS, even if the recent 2021 update and Germany to gather insights into the patient perspec-
of the European Academy of Neurology (EAN)/European tive concerning the transition period. The project used an
Committee for Treatment and Research in Multiple Sclerosis online survey to assess the experience of patients newly
(ECTRIMS) guidelines suggests the use of siponimod both in identified with SPMS, verifying their needs and explor-
patients with active and non-active SPMS [31]. ing patients’ perspectives about their transition phase to
Research and clinical studies have been performed in SPMS. The results of the project showed that around 40%
the past, and are still ongoing, to target, among others, of patients were not aware of their progressive condition
molecular mechanisms involved in MS progression, such [37]. This situation is particularly common in the south-
as oxidative stress [32], brain atrophy [33], demyelination ern regions of Italy, thus indicating that sociocultural
[34], and lack of remyelination [35]. biases influence the phenomenon, and that the necessary
improvement of the physician-patients communication
must be tailored to different geographic areas.
Physician–patient interaction
The unavailability of safe and effective therapies for SPMS Biomarkers for progression identification
often causes the discontinuation of DMTs in patients with
RRMS experiencing disability progression, as patients
Some prognostic factors predicting transition to SPMS have
and caregivers deal with the difficulties associated with
been identified. Lesions in the gray matter, spinal cord, and
the transition awareness process and communication with
infratentorial regions and high inflammatory activity at the
physicians [36].
1 3
48 Neurological Sciences (2023) 44:45–58
disease onset and in the following 5 years are well-known to research settings and still to be implemented in clinical
risk factors for future progression [38]. Thus far, biological practice, shows high potential in MS, as it would allow the
markers with a reliable prognostic value are missing and are targeting of many relevant mechanisms involved in demy-
definitively needed. Here, we report the most promising bio- elination, neuroinflammation, and neurodegeneration [48].
markers deserving attention in the research settings, which The use of PET in clinical practice is limited by the fact that
still need to be validated through standard procedures before TSPO ligands are not specific for MS, by the lower spatial
implementation into routine clinical practice. resolution of the technique compared to MRI, and by safety
concerns regarding ionizing radiation [49].
Neurofilaments and chitinase 3‑like 1
MRI biomarkers
Neurofilament light chain (Nfl), a cytoskeletal polypep-
Radiological biomarkers of progression are also employed
tide of the neuronal axon [39] from cerebrospinal fluid and
more widely in research than in clinical practice, and a
serum, can be accurately measured by single-molecule array
standardized method for the application of MRI is lacking.
(SIMOA) technology. The procedure is sensitive and repro-
MRI detection of whole-brain atrophy (WBA) is a strong
ducible, allowing the definition of a value that correlates
predictor of disability progression that could also help to
well with EDSS score and disease activity and progression.
discriminate stable patients from those in silent progression,
Some limitations hamper 45 Nfl use as a biomarker, includ-
as the latter tend to have a higher rate of brain atrophy [50].
ing that its increase is not specific for MS, as it indicates
However, WBA measure can be affected by fluctuations in
axonal destruction common to other neurodegenerative
brain volume due to internal (e.g., age, metabolism) and
pathologies. Moreover, blood levels of Nfl rise with aging
external (e.g., fluid intake, drugs, alcohol consumption) fac-
and are affected by disease activity, treatments, and comor-
tors [51]. WBA has been incorporated in the “no evidence of
bidities [40].
disease activity-4” (NEDA-4) criteria already including the
Chitinase 3-like 1 (CHI3L1) is a glycoprotein secreted
more diffuse NEDA-3 criteria, clinical markers such as acute
by activated glia, whose increment has been related to dis-
relapses and sustained disability progression, and one con-
ease progression, cognitive impairment, and disability [41].
ventional MRI marker (i.e., gadolinium-enhancing lesions
However, serum CHI3L1 levels are not specific for MS,
or new/enlarging T2 lesions) [52].
and their evaluation should be done by the analysis of the
Selected/specific MRI markers known to be involved in MS
cerebrospinal fluid, which is difficult in the clinical setting.
progression have gained considerable attention over the past
Measuring Nfl and CHI3L1 may help in identifying the sub-
years. However, advanced MRI techniques are necessary to
set of RRMS patients that will experience progression, but
detect some relevant biomarkers, such as cortical and deep gray
the invasiveness of evaluating CHI3L1 strongly limits its
matter damage, which are significantly associated with disease
determination [41].
progression [53]. Contrariwise, ventricular enlargement, an indi-
rect marker of WBA, can be more easily measured and has been
Retinal nerve fiber layer and ganglion cell/inner
shown to correlate with disease progression [54].
plexiform layer thickness
More recently, great interest has been solicited by the
identification of chronic active lesions (CAL, also called
MS often affects the anterior visual pathway; thus, the retina
“slowly expanding” or “smoldering” lesions). These are
represents a unique anatomical window to directly study
characterized by accumulation of microglia and mac-
neuronal damage. Retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) [42],
rophages at the edge of the lesion, dysfunction of the
reflecting the axonal density, and ganglion cell/inner plexi-
blood–brain barrier, and more severe demyelination and
form layer thickness (GCIPL) [43], reflecting the density of
axonal injury [55]. CALs expand over time and have a det-
neurons, can be measured by optical coherence tomography
rimental effect on the clinical course of the disease, such
(OCT). RNFL and GCIPL have been shown to correlate well
that their number has been shown to correlate well with
with increased risk of disability progression, although they
disease and disability progression [55]. Unfortunately,
show individual variability [44].
CALs can be visualized only using high-field MRI scan-
ners (operating at 3 T [56] and 7 T-MRI [57]), appearing
PET radiotracers uptake
as lesions with paramagnetic hypointense rim, due to the
presence of iron-laden-activated microglia. The presence
The uptake of PET radiotracers that bind translocator pro-
of activated microglia at the edge of CALs also allows
tein (TSPO)-like 11C-PK11195 [45], 11C-PBR28 [46], and their identification with PET tracers (i.e., C 11-PK11195)
18F-PBR06 [47], expected to mirror microglia activation, is
[58]. CALs represent a new potential/valuable biomarker
higher in SPMS patients. The use of PET, mostly limited
to predict the transition to SPMS and to evaluate the effect
1 3
Neurological Sciences (2023) 44:45–58 49
of DMTs on the development and evolution of these detri- detecting upper extremity and cognitive dysfunction. Moreo-
mental lesions. ver, it overestimates long-distance ambulation and does not
Other recently proposed brain MRI markers of disease allow proper measurement of short-distance ambulation. It
progression are represented by (i) the atrophied lesion should also be considered that ambulation abilities are often
volume, which is the volume left by atrophied T2 lesions self-reported by patients, thus decreasing the accuracy of the
replaced by cerebrospinal fluid and which might be an ear- final EDSS score.
lier predictor of progression compared to WBA [59], and A newer endpoint, EDSS plus, defined as 24 weeks con-
(ii) leptomeningeal inflammatory infiltrates [60], which firmed worsening of any of these three components (EDSS,
need delayed high-resolution postcontrast T2-FLAIR MRI lower-extremity function measured by timed 25-foot walk
in order to be identified. and upper-extremity function, measured by 9-Hole Peg Test)
Spinal cord (SC) lesions as well as measures of SC atro- is likely to be more sensitive than EDSS alone in measur-
phy have also been found to be highly predictive of MS ing disability progression in transition to SPMS [63]. Also,
progression, but SC images, particularly those suitable for the integration of the EDSS with cognitive measures, such
atrophy measurements, are not yet routinely acquired. This as the Brief International Cognitive Assessment for MS
limit could be overcome by including the cervical portion of (BICAMS), could increase the accuracy of the measure [64].
the spinal cord into the standard acquisition MRI protocol
of MS patients [50].
Cognitive dysfunction
Cognitive dysfunction is a common accompaniment of
Identifying patients transitioning
SPMS, with a very high prevalence in this clinical phenotype
towards SPMS: models and tools
[65]. Usually, language abilities are relatively spared, while
information processing speed (IPS) and episodic memory
Developing models to identify MS patients at risk of are domains more heavily affected [66]. There are no formal
progression has been the focus of many studies. Man- guidelines regarding the assessment of cognitive functions
ouchehrinia and colleagues generated a nomogram showing in MS. However, an Italian expert panel meeting provided
high predictive value for the risk of progression to SPMS recommendations such as the regular assessment of the cogni-
over 10–20 years, based on year of birth, sex, age at onset, tive functions every 6 months, which, in addition to the EDSS
EDSS score, and age at the first EDSS score [61]. Another score, would be of value for the early identification of second-
study employed both quantitative and qualitative approaches ary progression and the monitoring of SPMS patients [67].
through a multivariate analysis of observational study data Some studies have focused on developing digital tools for
that identified discriminating factors between RRMS and evaluating cognitive functions in MS. A computerized version
SPMS arising from interviews with patients and HCPs that of the Symbol Digit Modalities Test (cSDMT) was developed
explored impacts associated with transition [17]. These tools to evaluate information processing speed, a frequently observed
would provide support to clinicians in everyday practice, cognitive deficit in MS patients, in an easier and more reproduc-
without substituting the clinician experience and the need ible way [68]. cSDMT can be used as an app on smartphones
for instrumental examinations. allowing a closer follow-up of symptoms. A key of 9 symbol-
The MS Progression Discussion Tool (MSProDiscuss) digit pairs is provided during the test to the patient, who then
is another model created by clinicians to facilitate interac- has to associate the correct numbers to the symbols within 90 s
tions between HCPs and patients and to get insights into [69]. The advantage of the digital version compared to the clas-
the patient’s perspective of MS. It includes quantitative and sical test is the random changes of the key supported by the app,
qualitative assessments and may help close monitoring of thus avoiding the outcome being affected by code memorization
patients’ symptoms and impacts during transition [62]. How- (training effect) after repeated testing [69].
ever, it still needs to be validated in routine clinical practice. SDMT can be combined with both MRI and the EDSS
score to evaluate the effect of treatment. An oral version of
The EDSS scale
the SDMT, which does not require the need to hold a pen or
to touch the screen, has also been developed for patients with
The scales and scores used thus far to measure MS-associ- severe upper arm impairment [69].
ated disability need implementation to increase their accu- The BICAMS adds to the SMDT a visuospatial test (Brief
racy. The EDSS and the pyramidal functional system score Visuospatial Memory Test – Revised [BVMT-R]) and a
are the most widely standardized tools in both research verbal memory assessment (California Verbal Learning
and clinical practice. However, the EDSS has shown lim- Test). International validation exists for numerous countries
ited accuracy, as it has proven to be relatively insensitive in and takes approximately 15 min. It gives a more accurate
1 3
50 Neurological Sciences (2023) 44:45–58
neuropsychological assessment than the SDMT and can be Inclusion criteria for the healthcare professionals were the
easily integrated with the EDSS. This results in a more accu- 10-year experience in clinical neurology, their involvement
rate final score calculation in 25% of patients [64]. in MS clinical research and patient treatment, and their
publishing record related to MS.
E‑health: telemedicine and digital diagnostic tools
Before the first meeting, the participants reviewed the
literature with a particular focus on the most recent publica-
Telemedicine is currently seen as one of the best tools that will tions (from 2019 to 2021) searching PubMed with specific
help the prompt identification of changes in the disease course by keywords (Multiple Sclerosis progression AND patient-
allowing frequent physician–patient interaction. A comprehen- reported outcome OR patient communication; Multiple Scle-
sive neurological examination requires 40–60 min on average rosis progression — all fields AND biomarkers — Title and
for each patient, and reducing the time for patient-neurologist Abstract; Multiple Sclerosis progression AND diagnostic
encounters could lead to inaccurate diagnosis and poor patient tools), concerning the three topics reported below:
outcomes. A Virtual Visit Assessment (ViVA) following a struc-
tured protocol has been suggested for virtual patient management 1. Physician-patient interaction for MS progression
[70]. This protocol, successfully tested during the COVID-19 communication
health emergency, is composed of five steps (including pre-visit 2. Biomarkers for early MS progression identification
with a sharing documents phase, a virtual visit, and a post-visit 3. Diagnostic symptoms and tools for early MS progression
phase), takes around 54 min to complete and actively involves identification
the caregiver. Besides the potential benefits in terms of reduced
contagion risk, the ViVA model encountered the satisfaction Literature search identified 142 items for the first query,
of the patients, allowing the simplification of visit logistics, the 365 and 56 for the second and third, respectively. Partici-
re-enforcement of the link between patient and physician while pants were assigned to one of the three groups, and each
resulting in a limitation of overall costs [70], thus being a valid one selected around 10 articles to be used as a starting
alternative to the established standard visit. point for their discussion within the group. The flow chart
Moreover, the aforementioned MSProDiscuss tool is followed for paper selection is reported in Fig. 1.
reported to be reliable, simple, sensitive, and with good speci- During the first meeting, the current state of the art was
ficity; the neurologists confirmed its usability in clinical prac- presented. The experts discussed the three topics, highlight-
tice, and it can therefore represent another valid digital tool for ing possible solutions to the gaps identified. The result of the
patient evaluation in the absence of the in-person visit [62]. discussion was shared in plenary session at the end of the first
One possible drawback of the use of telemedicine and digi- meeting. On the basis of the output of the first meeting, one
tal tools is that they can be limited in older patients, who could of the organizers devised three statements for each topic, on a
lack Internet access or may not be supported by the appropriate 4-level Likert scale, to be administered to all the participants.
device. Besides, limited Internet access and a lack of Wi-Fi In the second meeting, the panel reviewed the proposed
connection may be shared issues for several patients. HCPs solutions and undertook further discussion on the statements
should carefully consider these factors before suggesting the in plenary session, to find agreement on actions to be applied
routine use of a digital app. in clinical practice. This methodology allowed an extensive
and productive discussion among the expert panel.
The outcome of the expert panel is summarized as fol-
Expert opinion
lows, with pinpointed sentences, percentage of agreement
on each sentence, and main discussion points.
Given the delayed detection and the lack of standardized
tools to identify patients, the SPMS population in Italy
is likely to be underestimated. A panel of 12 Italian MS
Physician–patient interaction
experts, six from the Campania region and six from Sicily,
for progression communication
took part in two virtual round tables (due to COVID-19
policy restrictions), to discuss the needs and the gaps in
1.1 Panelists underlined the need to develop a standardized shared
SPMS identification and management in this area of Italy
protocol allowing the timely communication of conversion
and the possible ways to anticipate diagnosis and start the
from RRMS to SPMS/progressive MS as it begins (Fig. 2A).
appropriate treatment promptly. Such issues, although with
slight differences among the different regions, are com-
mon to the whole country. Board members were selected
(A) The main points to be considered when drafting the
within these regions giving the proximity of the areas and
protocol were as follows:
the similarity in clinical and patient care organization.
1 3
Neurological Sciences (2023) 44:45–58 51
Fig. 1 Flow chart followed for
Physician-patient interaction Diagnostic Symptoms and
Biomarkers for early MS
the identification of the perti- Topic for MS progression progression identification Tools for early MS
communication progression identification
nent literature to be discussed
by the panel of experts
Multiple Sclerosis progression Multiple Sclerosis progression
Multiple Sclerosis progression
AND (all fields)
Query patient reported outcome OR AND AND
diagnostic tools
patient communication biomarkers (title and abstract)
Time filter: 2019-2021
Output 142 items 365 items 56 items
Expert selection
Papers for 9 papers 14 papers 7 papers
Discussion
• The need to increase patient awareness, both of the • Earlier awareness may create anxiety, discouragement,
possibility of disease conversion to progression and and lack of adherence towards therapy. Thus, it is man-
on the existence of an appropriate treatment. Patients datory that HCPs pay great attention to each patient’s
should be aware of the importance of regular disease personal feelings, attitudes and psychological status, and
monitoring and reassessment, to allow the timely their need for information. Sensitive communication, the
adjustment of the therapy, which will result in delay- use of a reassuring tone, and the right timing of infor-
ing disease progression and tackling the accumulation mation delivery should be carefully considered to allow
of disability. Postponing facing the topic of progression patient awareness and engagement.
reduces patient engagement. The HCP has to be clear • The patients appreciate telemedicine visits and the use of
in explaining the therapy options for the progressive digital devices as a communication tool.
phase, as the patient may see the possibility of pro-
gression as a limit to reaching and maintaining a good
quality of life (QoL). 1.2 The use of periodic structured interviews should be
• The patient should be informed about progression only encouraged to get insights into the patients’ perspective
by the MS specialist to avoid independent confounding and functional areas mainly associated with SPMS, with
sources of information. Follow-up visits are the right the aim of identifying patients at risk of progression
time to introduce the topic. (Fig. 2B). Interviews are helpful since the following:
Fig. 2 Experts’ agreement on A B C
physician–patient interaction
There is the need to The use of structured Clinical monitoring over a
for progression communication
develop a protocol allowing interviews during the visit period of 3-6 months is
issue. The panel of experts dis- the communication of should be encouraged suggested to identify
cussed three sentences with the progression from the first progression and the start of
respective level of agreement symptoms treatment
10%
20% 20%
60% 10% 30% 60%
20%
70%
Fully agree Partially agree Partially disagree Fully disagree
1 3
52 Neurological Sciences (2023) 44:45–58
• The first signs of progression are often detected by the • There is the need to validate and implement clinical indi-
patient, even before clinical and paraclinical evidence. cators that may predict progression (disability, cognition,
Structured interviews help to investigate and understand fatigue, sexual and sphincteric disturbances). Guide-
the patient’s overall QoL. Patient-reported outcomes, lines on the assessment of cognitive functions in MS are
digital tools, and digital visits could help identify the urgently needed.
progression early, providing insights on aspects that usu- • There is a need to focus on prognostic markers identify-
ally do not come to the attention of the HCP (such as a ing the transition.
change in everyday activities). • A “model of progression” for the disease could be elabo-
• The interview is a rapid tool, allowing the acquisition of infor- rated based on data coming from the first 2–5 years of the
mation without the need for an extended visit. All the informa- disease.
tion should be integrated with the expertise of the HCP. • The use of neurofilaments as biomarkers needs to be vali-
dated as the methods of analysis are not standardized for
clinical practice.
1.3 Clinical monitoring over a period of 3–6 months is sug-
gested to identify and confirm progression and to discuss
treatment options (Fig. 2C): 2.2 Centers of excellence for the clinical assessment of pro-
gression and working according to standardized MRI
protocols need to be identified (Fig. 3B):
• Transition to disease progression is very variable among
patients. Nevertheless, slight progression of signs and symp-
toms evaluated and confirmed after 3–6 months may identify • MRI is an easily accessible tool, and its use should
the patient at risk. Progression should be clearly discrimi- be implemented and standardized among specialized
nated from the worsening associated with relapses that can MRI centers equipped to evaluate brain atrophy. The
still characterize SPMS. The impact of confounding factors increase in brain atrophy without inflammatory activity
like seasonality should also be taken into account. [71] and progression independent of relapse activity
• Symptoms that slowly get worse over 3–6 months can be (PIRA) could herald progression [72]. Difficulties in
considered red flags; if they persist up to 6–12 months, pro- standardization of MRI acquisition and post-process-
gression can be confirmed and appropriate therapy initiated. ing make identifying signs of progression unreliable.
Signs of recent (clinical and/or radiological) disease activity The current conventional MRI protocols do not always
are currently mandatory for prescription of new drugs. allow early and reliable identification of markers
associated with transition to SPMS (e.g., increasing
Observation of slow worsening of symptoms can be number/volume of brain white matter lesions, high/
facilitated by telemedicine, which allows more frequent vis- increasing number of cortical lesions, accelerated rate
its and is appreciated, especially by patients with reduced of brain global/regional atrophy, high/increasing num-
mobility. The use of digital tools for monitoring progres- ber of slowly expanding lesions, and accelerated rate
sion (e.g., eSDMT) should be encouraged. A wrist-held of spinal cord damage/atrophy).
dynamometer may help to get an objective insight into motor • MRI acquisition and processing procedures need to be
capabilities, although an improvement in the detecting abil- standardized, and shared high-qualified MRI centers
ity of the device is wanted. would reduce the possibility of biases. It is necessary
to identify at regional or inter-regional level one or
more referral centers for the standardized evaluation of
Biomarkers for progression identification MRI biomarkers suggestive of progression. The center
(clinical and paraclinical) should be equipped with a 3 T MRI scanner.
• Neurologists and neuroradiologists should define
2.1 Patients with EDSS of 2.0/3.0 and factors associated standard criteria and procedures, and a committee/
with bad prognosis should be carefully evaluated to consortium should create a list of certified radiologi-
detect early signs of progression (Fig. 3A). Experts cal centers, to reach standardization of protocols and
agree on the following points: equipment at a regional level. The patient should be
provided with such a list. Patient MRI evaluation by a
referral center would be required every 1–2 years.
• EDSS cutoff at values of 2.0/3.0 could be too low to cor- • All the MS centers should be provided with a univocal
rectly identify patients at risk of progression. The EDSS protocol to be followed for MRI analysis; the results
score cutoff should be higher (3.0/4.0). could then be analyzed by a unique MS referral center.
1 3
Neurological Sciences (2023) 44:45–58 53
Fig. 3 Experts’ agreement A B C
on the need for biomarkers
An EDSS score of 2-3 and Centers of excellence for There is the need to
for progression identification
factors associated with bad the clinical assessment of establish a pilot protocol to
(clinical and instrumental). The
prognosis should be progression and working implement OCT in clinical
panel of experts discussed three
carefully evaluated to detect according to standardized practice
sentences with the respective early signs of progression MRI protocols need to be
level of agreement. EDSS, identified
Expanded Disability Status
Scale; MRI, magnetic resonance
10%
imaging; OCT, optical coher-
ence tomography
40%
50% 50% 30% 60%
60%
Fully agree Partially agree Partially disagree Fully disagree
Economic barriers in some areas and an overall short- use (Fig. 5A). The algorithm summarizes a possibly
age of personnel also need to be considered. useful strategy to identify patients facing the transition
period: an early and close evaluation of RRMS patients
who refer with a worsening condition, through cognitive
2.3 The panel of experts suggests establishing a pilot proto- tests, EDSS, and other disease scores. In this scenario,
col to implement OCT in clinical practice (Fig. 3C): anamnesis needs to be improved. A follow-up every
3–6 months is scheduled if no worsening is detected.
This increased frequency, as opposed to the standard
• Biomarkers such as RNFL and GCIP can be measured by 6–12 month follow-up visits, aims to avoid delay in
OCT. They seem to be promising and sensitive markers identifying progression. According to the algorithm, a
of progression, even if they are characterized by a cer- comprehensive neuropsychiatric assessment is suggested
tain degree of interindividual variability that needs to be for each patient.
taken into account. It is mandatory to follow the univo- When signs of worsening are detected, HCPs should
cal standardized protocol that identifies parameters to be verify and modulate the symptomatic treatment. If no
shared among MS centers to implement this measure in improvements are registered after 1–3 months, a DMT
routine clinical practice along with MRI [73]. switch is suggested with subsequent follow-up visits
• OCT could be a good screening test for all patients and every 3–4 months.
not only those at risk of progression. The proposed algorithm may represent an objective
• Other promising biomarkers useful to evaluate progres- tool to identify patients at risk of progression by closely
sion are Nfl, CHI3L1, PET radiotracers, and MRI bio- monitoring the first signs of worsening and verifying
markers. Univocal protocols for their quantification are whether modulation of symptomatic therapy results in
needed, because they show high variability, and their a short period of time. It is mandatory to have objective
reliability can be affected by potential bias. criteria for the identification of SPMS, because a discrep-
ancy between physicians could result in an inappropri-
ate and inconsistent classification of patients’ phenotype
Diagnostic symptoms and tools with detrimental consequences on treatment choices and
enrollment in clinical studies.
3.1 The panel suggests using a symptom-related algorithm
to identify patients at risk of progression (Fig. 4).
3.2 To improve disease management and treatment, there is
a strong need for ad hoc visits with the multidisciplinary
• This algorithm could be of help in clinical practice, and team and the routine use of a cognitive screening test
there is a good agreement among the experts about its (Fig. 5B and C):
1 3
54 Neurological Sciences (2023) 44:45–58
Fig. 4 Suggested “symptom- Suggested “symptoms-related” algorithm to be used in unclear transitional phases
related” algorithm to be used
in clinical practice to evaluate
RRMS
unclear diagnostic transitional
phases. DMT, disease-modify-
Subjective/referred
ing treatment; EDSS, Expanded clinical worsening
Disability Status Scale; RRMS,
relapsing–remitting multiple
sclerosis Clinical evaluation
EDSS, motility scores (including motor coordination and manual dexterity), cognitive tests
Motor/cognitive and other functional
Absence of objective signs of worsening
system worsening
Revised/optimized symptomatic treatment, cognitive Psychopathological evaluation
and/or motor rehabilitation, drugs to treat fatigue, and possible start of the psychotherapy
depression, insomnia, urological evaluation Follow-up every 3 months
1-3 months
Worsening No worsening
Change of DMT DMT maintainance and
symptomatic treatment
Follow-up every
3 months
Fig. 5 Experts’ agreement on A B C
the strategies for diagnostic
Need to implement Need to establish a Need to make use of the
symptoms and tools. The panel
the suggested multidisciplinary team electronic symbol digit
of experts discussed three sen-
“symptoms-related” providing ad hoc visit modality test (eSDMT)
tences with the respective level
algorithm in the clinical routine
of agreement
20% 20%
80% 80% 100%
Fully agree Partially agree Partially disagree Fully disagree
• The professionals included in a representative multidisci- • Patients at risk of progression would benefit from an
plinary team are neurologists, neuroradiologists, ophthal- extended visit time, where different needs would be bet-
mologists, neuropsychologists, psychiatrists, and MS-spe- ter evaluated.
cialized nurses. They collaborate by collecting data about • A medical office with an MS specialist dedicated only
different functional areas, allowing a complete anamnesis to transitioning and SPMS patients is suggested. Here,
and the evaluation of the overall neurologic status of the the multidisciplinary team could periodically reassess the
patient. Other figures that should be involved are caregiv- patient’s symptoms dedicating more time to the SPMS
ers and rehabilitation specialists. Multidisciplinary teams patient to overcome their reluctance in communicat-
across Europe are differently composed: in Germany and ing signs of worsening. High attention has to be paid to
the UK, besides specialized neurologists, physiotherapists fatigue, for which an objective scale is still lacking, and
and rehabilitation specialists are involved; social workers to upper limb dexterity. Tools such as eSDMT, MS Pro
are present in France and the UK [74]. Discuss, and CogEval could help. In particular, CogEval
1 3
Neurological Sciences (2023) 44:45–58 55
should be evaluated in light of the sociocultural context of evolution of the disease, and nurses and caregivers
of the patient. Should the dedicated office be absent, should cooperate in highlighting symptoms and clari-
the MS specialists must request a specific evaluation by fying disease definition. The identification of new bio-
other specialists belonging to the multidisciplinary team, markers would help to define the evolution of the disease
according to the specific patient’s condition. better, and MS specialized centers have to be identified
• The nurses may have a prominent role in identifying to conduct the appropriate examination of the biological
the first signs of transition, as they closely monitor the and radiological markers associated with progression.
patients and meet them more often [75]. – DMT decision requires an experienced team which would
• The caregiver should be strongly engaged in the disease assess the patient’s condition and start the appropriate
management path. The role of the caregiver is central in treatment; adherence with the new treatment is expected
understanding the signs of progression. The caregiver to be high, given the type of administration (oral route)
is aware of the patient’s everyday life and has a whole and the available reimbursement from the National
vision of the patient situation, which is extremely useful Health Service.
to clarify the scenario of symptoms and their evolution. – Follow-up visits should be frequent and based on exami-
• Telemedicine is another central aspect that needs to be nations by the multidisciplinary team, so that different
implemented. Telemedicine is usually appreciated by aspects of the disease are carefully evaluated. Digital
patients with reduced mobility and should integrate tra- apps and telemedicine would support patient monitor-
ditional visits of follow-up, ensuring closer monitoring ing. Patients and their caregivers should be given support
of patients. to improve daily QoL.
• The SDMT through a smartphone app is a useful and – A reassessment of the patient’s condition should be
fast tool, showing comparable reliability to the SDMT provided every 6 months to evaluate the efficacy of the
administered by the HCPs, and would be of great help to therapy. As the treatment for SPMS has been recently
detect signs of progression and evaluate the success of approved, updating guidelines for reassessment and pos-
the therapy. An increase of 4 points in the SDMT is con- sible adjustments must be ongoing.
sidered clinically relevant. The MS professionals pointed
out that the app needs to be translated into the local lan-
Conclusion
guage, and that it is important to get a graphical output
of the analysis provided by the app so that the physician
can quickly read the results. SPMS is poorly identified, and its incidence and prevalence
are underestimated in Italy, owing to the lack of reliable
diagnostic tools. Thus far, the lack of a specific, effective,
Summary
and safe treatment discouraged MS professionals from a
timely and clear communication of the transition phase to
To summarize the joint work of the expert panel, these are the patient, even after the progression to SPMS was con-
the core points that were identified as central for the manage- firmed. Now that a therapeutic option is available, there is
ment of patients with MS experiencing the first suspected the need for adequate education both for patients, regarding
symptoms of progression: the evolution of the disease and the possibility of a specific
treatment, and for MS professionals, to train them to inter-
– MS specialists, general practitioners, caregivers, and act with the patients effectively and sensitively. The use of
nurses should cooperate to increase the patient’s aware- digital tools to detect signs of progression and support the
ness on his/her condition and on the DMT for RRMS in patients during the disease course must be increased. Earlier
order to prevent or postpone the development of SPMS. communication means earlier identification of progression,
– During follow-up visits, the possibility of progression which accounts for early and more effective treatment.
and DMT switch should be discussed. The patient should Early active SPMS may represent an important thera-
pay attention to the evolution of the disease and comply peutic window where early treatment has been shown to
with increased frequency in monitoring and with RRMS increase the time taken to reach higher disability milestones,
therapy. Patients that are suspected to be moving into finally preserving the patient’s QoL.
the transition phase should be closely monitored for
3–6 months to avoid delay in SPMS identification and Acknowledgements Medical writing, which was funded by Novartis
Farma SpA, was provided by Valeria Benedusi, PhD, and Ray Hill, on
treatment.
behalf of Health Publishing and Services Srl.
– On identifying SPMS, the MS specialists have to clearly
explain the scenario to their patients. The biomarkers of Author contribution GL, VBM, SB, AG, DM, GTM, FS, GS, SC, ES,
progression should be evaluated to identify the degree MB, and LMEG, conceptualization, methodology, writing — review
1 3
56 Neurological Sciences (2023) 44:45–58
and editing, and approving the final draft. MB, LM, and RT, conceptu- 4. Lublin FD (2014) New multiple sclerosis phenotypic classifica-
alization, project administration, methodology, writing — review and tion. Eur Neurol 72(Suppl 1):1–5. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1159/ 00036
editing, and approving the final draft. 7614
5. Plantone D, De Angelis F, Doshi A, Chataway J (2016) Secondary
Funding This review reports the outcome of two virtual round tables progressive multiple sclerosis: definition and measurement. CNS
among a panel of 12 Italian MS experts discussing the present state Drugs 30(6):517–526. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/s 40263-0 16-0 340-9
of SPMS and indentifying the insights on SPMS diagnosis and man- 6. Kavaliunas A, Manouchehrinia A, Stawiarz L et al (2017) Impor-
agement in the south of Italy. The round tables were supported by tance of early treatment initiation in the clinical course of multiple
Novartis. sclerosis. Mult Scler 23(9):1233–1240. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/
13524 58516 675039
7. Brown JWL, Coles A, Horakova D et al (2019) Association of
Declarations
initial disease-modifying therapy with later conversion to second-
ary progressive multiple sclerosis. JAMA 321(2):175–187. https://
Conflict of interest GL declares to be a consultant for Allergan, Almi- doi. org/ 10. 1001/ jama. 2018. 20588
rall, Biogen, Novartis Sanofi, Merck Serono, Bristol, Ipsen, and Bristol 8. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (2019) Mayzent (siponi-
Celgene. VBM has received funding for research support and speaker mod) tablets for oral use: highlights of prescribing informa-
honoraria from Novartis, Roche, Biogen, Teva, Almirall, Sanofi-Gen- tion. Summary of product characteristics. Available from: http://
zyme, Merck, Bayer, and Mylan. SB received speaker honoraria and/ www.a ccess data.f da.g ov/d rugsa tfda_d ocs/l abel/2 019/2 09884 s000
or advisory board fee from Novartis, Sanofi Genzyme, Merck-Serono, lbl. pdf. Accessed 5 Dec 2021
Brystol-Meyers, Biogen-Idec, Viatris, and Roche. AG received per- 9. European Medicines Agency (EMA) (2020) Mayzent (sipinimod
sonal compensations for speaking or consultancy from Biogen, Bristol as sipinimod fumaric acid) film-coated tablets: summary of prod-
Myers Squibb, Merck-Serono, Mylan, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi-Gen- uct characteristics. Available from: https:// www. ema. europa. eu/
zyme, and Teva. GTM received personal compensations from Serono, en/ medic ines/ human/ EPAR/ mayze nt. Accessed 5 Dec 2021
Biogen, Novartis, Roche, and TEVA for public speaking and advisory 10. Planche V, Gibelin M, Cregut D, Pereira B, Clavelou P (2016)
boards. FS received public speaking honoraria from Alexion, Argenx, Cognitive impairment in a population-based study of patients with
Biogen, Mylan, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi, and Teva; he also received multiple sclerosis: differences between late relapsing-remitting,
compensation for advisory boards or consultation fees from Alexion, secondary progressive and primary progressive multiple sclerosis.
Almirall, Argenx, Avexis, Biogen, Forward Pharma, Lexeo Therapeu- Eur J Neurol 23(2):282–289. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ ene. 12715
tics, Merk, Novartis, Novatek, Roche, Sanofi, and Takeda. MB de- 11. Bogosian A, Morgan M, Moss-Morris R (2019) Multiple chal-
clares fees from Biogen, Sanofi Genzyme, Roche, and Novartis. DM, lenges for people after transitioning to secondary progressive
GS, SC, ES, and LMEG declare no competing interests. MB, LM, and multiple sclerosis: a qualitative study. BMJ Open 9(3):e026421.
RT declare to be Novartis employees. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bmjop en- 2018- 026421
12. Absinta M, Lassmann H, Trapp BD (2020) Mechanisms under-
Ethical approval Our study did not require an ethical board approval lying progression in multiple sclerosis. Curr Opin Neurol
because no patients were actively involved. 33(3):277–285. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 097/W CO.0 00000 00000 00818
13. Tsagkas C, Magon S, Gaetano L et al (2018) Spinal cord volume
Informed consent Not applicable. loss: a marker of disease progression in multiple sclerosis. Neurol-
ogy 91(4):e349–e358. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 212/W NL.0 00000 0000
005853
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri- 14. Magliozzi R, Howell OW, Reeves C et al (2010) A gradient of
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta- neuronal loss and meningeal inflammation in multiple sclerosis.
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long Ann Neurol 68(4):477–493. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ ana. 22230
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 15. Inojosa H, Proschmann U, Akgun K, Ziemssen T (2021) A focus
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes on secondary progressive multiple sclerosis (SPMS): challenges
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are in diagnosis and definition. J Neurol 268(4):1210–1221. https://
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00415- 019- 09489-5
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 16. Carotenuto A, Signoriello E, Lanzillo R et al (2020) Unraveling
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not diagnostic uncertainty in transition phase from relapsing-remitting
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will to secondary progressive multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler Relat Dis-
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a ord 43:102211. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. msard. 2020. 102211
copy of this licence, visit http://c reati vecom mons.o rg/l icens es/b y/4.0 /. 17. Ziemssen T, Tolley C, Bennett B et al (2020) A mixed meth-
ods approach towards understanding key disease characteristics
associated with the progression from RRMS to SPMS: physi-
cians’ and patients’ views. Mult Scler Relat Disord 38:101861.
References
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. msard. 2019. 101861
18. University of California, Team SFMSE, Cree, et al. (2019)
Silent progression in disease activity-free relapsing multiple
1. Thompson AJ, Baranzini SE, Geurts J, Hemmer B, Ciccarelli O
sclerosis. Ann Neurol 85(5):653–666. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/
(2018) Multiple sclerosis. Lancet 391(10130):1622–1636. https://
ana. 25463
doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0140- 6736(18) 30481-1
19. Kleiter I, Ayzenberg I, Havla J et al (2020) The transitional phase
2. Lublin FD, Reingold SC, Cohen JA et al (2014) Defining the clini-
of multiple sclerosis: characterization and conceptual framework.
cal course of multiple sclerosis: the 2013 revisions. Neurology
Mult Scler Relat Disord 44:102242. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j.
83(3):278–286. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 212/W NL.0 00000 00000 00560
msard. 2020. 102242
3. Kurtzke JF (1983) Rating neurologic impairment in multiple
20. Coret F, Perez-Miralles FC, Gascon F et al (2018) Onset of sec-
sclerosis: an expanded disability status scale (EDSS). Neurology
ondary progressive multiple sclerosis is not influenced by current
33(11):1444–1452. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1212/ wnl. 33. 11. 1444
relapsing multiple sclerosis therapies. Mult Scler J Exp Transl
1 3
Neurological Sciences (2023) 44:45–58 57
Clin 4(2):2055217318783347. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 20552 37 Solari A, Giovannetti AM, Giordano A et al (2019) Conversion to
17318 783347 secondary progressive multiple sclerosis: patient awareness and
21. Hartung HP, Gonsette R, Konig N et al (2002) Mitoxantrone in needs Results from an online survey in Italy and Germany. Front
progressive multiple sclerosis: a placebo-controlled, double-blind, Neurol 10:916. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fneur. 2019. 00916
randomised, multicentre trial. Lancet 360(9350):2018–2025. 38. Filippi M, Preziosa P, Barkhof F et al (2021) Diagnosis of progres-
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0140- 6736(02) 12023-X sive multiple sclerosis from the imaging perspective: a review.
22. Fox EJ (2004) Mechanism of action of mitoxantrone. Neurology JAMA Neurol 78(3):351–364. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 001/j amane urol.
63(12 Suppl 6):S15–S18. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1212/ wnl. 63. 12_ 2020. 4689
suppl_6. s15 39. Bergman J, Dring A, Zetterberg H et al (2016) Neurofilament light
23. Ghalie RG, Edan G, Laurent M et al (2002) Cardiac adverse in CSF and serum is a sensitive marker for axonal white matter
effects associated with mitoxantrone (Novantrone) therapy in injury in MS. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm 3(5):e271.
patients with MS. Neurology 59(6):909–913. https:// doi. org/ 10. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1212/ NXI. 00000 00000 000271
1212/ wnl. 59.6. 909 40. Bridel C, van Wieringen WN, Zetterberg H et al (2019) Diag-
24. Rossato LG, Costa VM, Dallegrave E et al (2014) Cumulative nostic value of cerebrospinal fluid neurofilament light protein in
mitoxantrone-induced haematological and hepatic adverse effects neurology: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Neurol
in a subchronic in vivo study. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol 76(9):1035–1048. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 001/j amane urol.2 019.1 534
114(3):254–262. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ bcpt. 12143 41. Gil-Perotin S, Castillo-Villalba J, Cubas-Nunez L et al (2019)
25. Kuhle J, Hardmeier M, Disanto G et al (2016) A 10-year follow- Combined cerebrospinal fluid neurofilament light chain protein
up of the European multicenter trial of interferon beta-1b in sec- and chitinase-3 like-1 levels in defining disease course and prog-
ondary-progressive multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler 22(4):533–543. nosis in multiple sclerosis. Front Neurol 10:1008. https://d oi.o rg/
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 13524 58515 594440 10. 3389/ fneur. 2019. 01008
26. Hawker K, O’Connor P, Freedman MS et al (2009) Rituximab in 42. Sotirchos ES, Gonzalez Caldito N, Filippatou A et al (2020) Pro-
patients with primary progressive multiple sclerosis: results of gressive multiple sclerosis is associated with faster and specific
a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled multicenter trial. retinal layer atrophy. Ann Neurol 87(6):885–896. https:// doi. org/
Ann Neurol 66(4):460–471. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ ana. 21867 10. 1002/ ana. 25738
27. Montalban X, Hauser SL, Kappos L et al (2017) Ocrelizumab 43. Bsteh G, Berek K, Hegen H et al (2021) Macular ganglion cell-
versus placebo in primary progressive multiple sclerosis. N Engl inner plexiform layer thinning as a biomarker of disability pro-
J Med 376(3):209–220. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 056/N EJMoa 16064 68 gression in relapsing multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler 27(5):684–
28. Lublin F, Miller DH, Freedman MS et al (2016) Oral fingolimod 694. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 13524 58520 935724
in primary progressive multiple sclerosis (INFORMS): a phase 44. Winges KM, Murchison CF, Bourdette DN, Spain RI (2019) Lon-
3, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet gitudinal optical coherence tomography study of optic atrophy
387(10023):1075–1084. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 016/S 0140-6 736(15) in secondary progressive multiple sclerosis: results from a clini-
01314-8 cal trial cohort. Mult Scler 25(1):55–62. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/
29. Kapoor R, Ho PR, Campbell N et al (2018) Effect of natalizumab 13524 58517 739136
on disease progression in secondary progressive multiple sclero- 45. Politis M, Giannetti P, Su P et al (2012) Increased PK11195 PET
sis (ASCEND): a phase 3, randomised, double-blind, placebo- binding in the cortex of patients with MS correlates with dis-
controlled trial with an open-label extension. Lancet Neurol ability. Neurology 79(6):523–530. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 212/W NL.
17(5):405–415. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S1474- 4422(18) 30069-3 0b013 e3182 635645
30. Kappos L, Bar-Or A, Cree BAC et al (2018) Siponimod ver- 46. Herranz E, Gianni C, Louapre C et al (2016) Neuroinflammatory
sus placebo in secondary progressive multiple sclerosis component of gray matter pathology in multiple sclerosis. Ann
(EXPAND): a double-blind, randomised, phase 3 study. Lancet Neurol 80(5):776–790. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ ana. 24791
391(10127):1263–1273. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 016/S 0140-6 736(18) 47. Singhal T, O’Connor K, Dubey S et al (2019) Gray matter micro-
30475-6 glial activation in relapsing vs progressive MS: a [F-18]PBR06-
31. Vukusic S, Otero-Romero S, Farez M et al (2021) Biomarkers/ PET study. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm 6(5):e587.
translational therapy. ECTRIMS-EAN Session.ECTRIMS 2021 https:// doi. org/ 10. 1212/ NXI. 00000 00000 000587
congress reporting. https:// www. ectri ms- congr ess. eu/ 2021. html 48. Bauckneht M, Capitanio S, Raffa S et al (2019) Molecular imaging
32. Spain R, Powers K, Murchison C et al (2017) Lipoic acid in sec- of multiple sclerosis: from the clinical demand to novel radiotrac-
ondary progressive MS: a randomized controlled pilot trial. Neu- ers. EJNMMI Radiopharm Chem 4(1):6. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 186/
rol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm 4(5):e374. https:// doi. org/ 10. s41181- 019- 0058-3
1212/ NXI. 00000 00000 000374 49. Preziosa P, Rocca MA, Filippi M (2019) PET is necessary to make
33. Fox RJ, Coffey CS, Conwit R et al (2018) Phase 2 trial of ibudilast the next step forward in understanding MS pathophysiology - no.
in progressive multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 379(9):846–855. Mult Scler 25(8):1088–1090. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 177/1 35245 8518
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1056/ NEJMo a1803 583 820238
34. Cadavid D, Mellion M, Hupperts R et al (2019) Safety and effi- 50. Tavazzi E, Zivadinov R, Dwyer MG et al (2020) MRI biomarkers
cacy of opicinumab in patients with relapsing multiple sclerosis of disease progression and conversion to secondary-progressive
(SYNERGY): a randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial. multiple sclerosis. Expert Rev Neurother 20(8):821–834. https://
Lancet Neurol 18(9):845–856. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S1474- doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 14737 175. 2020. 17574 35
4422(19) 30137-1 51. Grajauskas LA, Siu W, Medvedev G et al (2019) MRI-based
35. Bramow S, Frischer JM, Lassmann H et al (2010) Demyelina- evaluation of structural degeneration in the ageing brain: patho-
tion versus remyelination in progressive multiple sclerosis. Brain physiology and assessment. Ageing Res Rev 49:67–82. https://
133(10):2983–2998. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ brain/ awq250 doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. arr. 2018. 11. 004
36. Burtchell J, Fetty K, Miller K, Minden K, Kantor D (2019) Two 52. Guevara C, Garrido C, Martinez M et al (2019) Prospective
sides to every story: perspectives from four patients and a health- assessment of no evidence of disease activity-4 status in early
care professional on multiple sclerosis disease progression. Neurol disease stages of multiple sclerosis in routine clinical practice.
Ther 8(2):185–205. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s40120- 019- 0141-4 Front Neurol 10:788. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fneur. 2019. 00788
1 3
58 Neurological Sciences (2023) 44:45–58
53. Pontillo G, Cocozza S, Lanzillo R et al (2019) Determinants of 65. Brochet B, Ruet A (2019) Cognitive impairment in multiple scle-
deep gray matter atrophy in multiple sclerosis: a multimodal MRI rosis with regards to disease duration and clinical phenotypes.
study. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 40(1):99–106. https:// doi. org/ 10. Front Neurol 10:261. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fneur. 2019. 00261
3174/ ajnr. A5915 66. Rocca MA, Amato MP, De Stefano N et al (2015) Clinical and
54. Pontillo G, Cocozza S, Di Stasi M et al (2020) 2D linear meas- imaging assessment of cognitive dysfunction in multiple sclero-
ures of ventricular enlargement may be relevant markers of sis. Lancet Neurol 14(3):302–317. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 016/S 1474-
brain atrophy and long-term disability progression in multiple 4422(14) 70250-9
sclerosis. Eur Radiol 30(7):3813–3822. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 67. Amato MP, Morra VB, Falautano M et al (2018) Cognitive
s00330- 020- 06738-4 assessment in multiple sclerosis-an Italian consensus. Neurol Sci
55. Absinta M, Sati P, Masuzzo F et al (2019) Association of chronic 39(8):1317–1324. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10072- 018- 3427-x
active multiple sclerosis lesions with disability in vivo. JAMA Neurol 68. Bigi S, Marrie RA, Till C et al (2017) The computer-based Sym-
76(12):1474–1483. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1001/ jaman eurol. 2019. 2399 bol Digit Modalities Test: establishing age-expected performance
56. Absinta M, Sati P, Fechner A et al (2018) Identification of chronic in healthy controls and evaluation of pediatric MS patients. Neurol
active multiple sclerosis lesions on 3T MRI. AJNR Am J Neuro- Sci 38(4):635–642. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10072- 017- 2813-0
radiol 39(7):1233–1238. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3174/ ajnr. A5660 69. Pham L, Harris T, Varosanec M et al (2021) Smartphone-based
57. Absinta M, Sati P, Schindler M et al (2016) Persistent 7-Tesla symbol-digit modalities test reliably captures brain damage in
phase rim predicts poor outcome in new multiple sclerosis patient multiple sclerosis. NPJ Digit Med 4(1):36. https:// doi. org/ 10.
lesions. J Clin Invest 126(7):2597–2609. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 172/ 1038/ s41746- 021- 00401-y
JCI86 198 70. Bergamaschi R, Tronconi L, Bosone D et al. (2021) Description
58. Kaunzner UW, Kang Y, Zhang S et al (2019) Quantitative sus- and preliminary experience with virtual visit assessment (ViVA)
ceptibility mapping identifies inflammation in a subset of chronic during the COVID-19 pandemic, a structured virtual management
multiple sclerosis lesions. Brain 142(1):133–145. https://d oi.o rg/ protocol for patients with multiple sclerosis. Neurol Sci. https://
10. 1093/ brain/ awy296 doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10072- 021- 05371-3
59. Genovese AV, Hagemeier J, Bergsland N et al (2019) Atrophied 71. Koudriavtseva T, Mainero C (2016) Brain atrophy as a measure
brain T2 lesion volume at MRI is associated with disability pro- of neuroprotective drug effects in multiple sclerosis: influence
gression and conversion to secondary progressive multiple scle- of inflammation. Front Hum Neurosci 10:226. https:// doi. org/ 10.
rosis. Radiology 293(2):424–433. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1148/ radiol. 3389/ fnhum. 2016. 00226
20191 90306 72. Kappos L, Butzkueven H, Wiendl H et al (2018) Greater sensi-
60. Zivadinov R, Ramasamy DP, Vaneckova M et al (2017) Leptome- tivity to multiple sclerosis disability worsening and progression
ningeal contrast enhancement is associated with progression of events using a roving versus a fixed reference value in a prospec-
cortical atrophy in MS: a retrospective, pilot, observational lon- tive cohort study. Mult Scler 24(7):963–973. https:// doi. org/ 10.
gitudinal study. Mult Scler 23(10):1336–1345. https://d oi.o rg/1 0. 1177/ 13524 58517 709619
1177/ 13524 58516 678083 73. Tewarie P, Balk L, Costello F et al (2012) The OSCAR-IB con-
61. Manouchehrinia A, Zhu F, Piani-Meier D et al (2019) Predicting sensus criteria for retinal OCT quality assessment. PLoS One
risk of secondary progression in multiple sclerosis: a nomogram. 7(4):e34823. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1371/ journ al. pone. 00348 23
Mult Scler 25(8):1102–1112. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 177/1 35245 8518 74. Torkildsen O, Linker RA, Sesmero JM et al (2021) Living with
783667 secondary progressive multiple sclerosis in Europe: perspectives
62. Ziemssen T, Piani-Meier D, Bennett B et al (2020) A physician- of multiple stakeholders. Neurodegener Dis Manag 11(1):9–19.
completed digital tool for evaluating disease progression (Multiple https:// doi. org/ 10. 2217/ nmt- 2020- 0054
Sclerosis Progression Discussion Tool): validation study. J Med 75. Helleso R, Fagermoen MS (2010) Cultural diversity between hos-
Internet Res 22(2):e16932. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2196/ 16932 pital and community nurses: implications for continuity of care.
63. Cadavid D, Cohen JA, Freedman MS et al (2017) The EDSS-Plus, Int J Integr Care 10:e036. https:// doi. org/ 10. 5334/ ijic. 508
an improved endpoint for disability progression in secondary pro-
gressive multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler 23(1):94–105. https:// doi. Publisher's note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
org/ 10. 1177/ 13524 58516 638941 jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
64. Sacca F, Costabile T, Carotenuto A et al (2017) The EDSS inte-
gration with the Brief International Cognitive Assessment for
Multiple Sclerosis and orientation tests. Mult Scler 23(9):1289–
1296. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 13524 58516 677592
1 3