| TYPEHypothesisandTheory
PUBLISHED20September2023
DOI10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
Implications of immersive
technologies in healthcare sector
EDITEDBY and its built environment
FernandoLoizides,
CardiffUniversity,UnitedKingdom
REVIEWEDBY Eunsil Yang*
EleftheriaSavvopoulou,
SynThesisArchitects,Greece Healthcare Facilities, Bartlett School of Sustainable Construction, University College London,
NathanJones, London, United Kingdom
CardiffUniversity,UnitedKingdom
*CORRESPONDENCE Objectives: This research focuses on how built environment experts can
EunsilYang
contribute to the MXR-enabled digital innovation as part of the multidisciplinary
eunsil.yang.21@ucl.ac.uk
team effort to ensure post-pandemic resilience in healthcare built environment.
RECEIVED12March2023
The goal of this research is to help healthcare providers, built environment
ACCEPTED04September2023
experts, and policy makers respectively: (1) Advocate the benefits of MXR for
PUBLISHED20September2023
innovating health and social care; (2) Spark debate across networks of expertise
CITATION
to create health-promoting environment; and (3) Understand the overriding
YangE(2023)Implicationsofimmersive
technologiesinhealthcaresectoranditsbuilt prioritiesin making effectivepathwaystothe implementationof MXR.
environment. Methods: To highlight the novelty of this research, the study relies on two
Front.Med.Technol.5:1184925. qualitative methodologies: exploratory literature review and semi-structured
doi:10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
interviews. Based on the evaluation of prior works and cross-national case
COPYRIGHT studies, hypotheses are formulated from three arenas: (1) Cross-sectional
©2023Yang.Thisisanopen-accessarticle
Initiatives for Post-pandemic Resilience; (2) Interoperability and Usability of
distributedunderthetermsoftheCreative
CommonsAttributionLicense(CCBY).Theuse, Next-gen Medicines; and (3) Metaverse and New Forms of Value in Future
distributionorreproductioninotherforumsis Healthcare Ecosystems. To verify those hypotheses, empirical findings are
permitted,providedtheoriginalauthor(s)and
derivedfromin-depthinterviews with ninekeyinformants.
thecopyrightowner(s)arecreditedandthatthe
originalpublicationinthisjournaliscited,in
Results:Themainfindingsaresummarizedunderthefollowingthreethemes:(1)
accordancewithacceptedacademicpractice. Synergism between Architecture and Technology; (2) Patient Empowerment and
Nouse,distributionorreproductionis
Staff Support; and (3) Scalable Health and Wellbeing in Non-hospital and
permittedwhichdoesnotcomplywiththese
terms. Therapeutic Settings. Firstly, both built environment and healthcare sectors can
benefit from the various capabilities of MXR through cross-sectional initiatives,
evidence-based practices, and participatory approaches. Secondly, a confluence
of knowledge and methods of HCI and HBI can increase the interoperabilityand
usability of MXR for the patient-centered and value-based healthcare models.
Thirdly, the MXR-enabled technological regime will largely affect the new forms
of value in healthcare premises by fostering more decentralized, preventive, and
therapeuticcharacteristics in thefuturehealthcare ecosystems.
Conclusion: Whether it’s virtual or physical, our healthcare systems have placed
great emphasis on the rigor of evidence-based approach linking health
outcome to a clinical environment. Henceforth, built environment experts
should seek closer ties with the MXR ecosystems for the co-production of
scalable health and wellbeing in non-hospital and therapeutic settings.
Ultimately, this is to improve resource efficiency in the healthcare sector while
considering the transition of health resources towards in silico status by
increasingthe implementationof MXR.
KEYWORDS
immersivetechnology,extendedreality(XR),medicalextendedreality(MXR),virtualreality
(VR), digital health, health metaverse, therapeutic environment, future healthcare
ecosystems
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 01 frontiersin.org
Yang 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
1. Introduction Figure 2). Also, an early adoption of XR addressed some of the
biggest public health challenges from the COVID-19 pandemic,
This research takes qualitative approaches to examine the accordingtoHealthEducationEngland(15,16).
ImplicationsofImmersiveTechnologiesintheHealthcareSectorand MXR is one of the key digital health technologies that can
itsBuiltEnvironment.Bydoingso,theresearchaimstoshedlighton reinforcethesociologicalcharacteristicsoffuturehealthcaresystems.
how built environment experts can contribute to more resilient For instance, National Health Services (NHS) in the UK operates
healthcare systems in the post-pandemic future. Harnessing digital Health Call and Virtual Wards to increase access to digital
technologies enables us to reimagine healthcare models and healthcare solutions, thus mitigating health inequities across the
workforceagility(1–3)andremotecarehasbecomeamajortrendfor country. Babylon, a digital health company, launched the AI-
public health services (4). In June 2022, the UK government issued powered triage tool in Rwanda to improve the country’s healthcare
the “Digital Revolution of Health and Social Care”, considering the systems by digitizing them (17). Particularly, MXR can help fight a
rapid expansion of remote care to free up hospital space; save chronic healthcare issue of staff retention. Broomx Technologies,
clinician time; and bust the COVID backlogs (5). Meanwhile, the Spanish immersive solutions company, supports the mental
immersive technologies are becoming readily available for more health and wellbeing of healthcare workers through their multi-
interactive, engaging, and efficient medical practices. Figure 1 sensory projects, called “Humanization of Hospital Spaces” (18). In
describesthepropertiesofimmersivetechnologiesbyjuxtaposingtwo our rapidly ageing society, many experts and researchers have
opposite ends—reality and virtuality (6, 7). In this research, predicted that the next generation of health and social care will be
immersive technologies will be used interchangeably with Extended shiftedto “From-Facility-To-Home” or “Hospital-at-Home” models,
Reality (XR), an umbrella term encapsulating Augmented Reality especiallyforolderadults.Moreover,XRcanbenefittheelderlyand
(AR), Virtual Reality (VR), and Mixed Reality (MR). Specifically, theircaregiversby increasingtheirautonomyinlives,thusreducing
MedicalExtendedReality(MXR)referstoXRinhealthcare. socialandeconomicburdenoftheentiresociety(19–25).
WhenconsideringthetechnologyadoptionratesofUShouseholds, Coupled with the exponential growth of MXR, the healthcare
itisexpectedthatatleast70millionuserswilladoptXRwithin6years metaverse will soon provide an open platform for real-time
(8).GoldmanSachsGlobalInvestmentestimatedthe2025globalXR collaboration(26–29).Althoughitisstillinitsembryonicstage,the
market size by different use cases where the healthcare industry metaverse as a nascent paradigm gains more credibility with the
represents $5.1bn (9). Bloomberg UK forecaststhat the global MXR increasing prevalence of three major technologies: telepresence,
marketrevenuegrowthwillreach$14.06bnby2030duetotherising digital twin, and blockchain (30–32) (see Figure 3). Consequently,
demand of accurate robotic surgery (10). Furthermore, the COVID- healthcare facilities must evolve in response to this technological
19 pandemic has propelled disruptive innovation to come up with disruption because a new modality of healthcare will later
new ways of delivering healthcare services. As climate change will transform its built environment when XR finally becomes integral
causemorefrequentviraloutbreaks,XRwillfindawiderapplication to the future healthcare ecosystems. Yet, most of the current
in healthcare industry (11–13). In the UK, various XR technologies academic discourse and market research on MXR were conducted
assisted healthcare roles during the COVID-19 epidemic (14) (see from the healthcare providers’ perspectives. With increasing
FIGURE1
Reality-virtualitycontinuumofimmersivetechnologies.
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 02 frontiersin.org
Yang 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
FIGURE2
MXRduringCOVID-19(14),showingsuggestedXRtechnologiesandappsforasmallportionofhealthcareroles.Reproducedwithpermissionofthe
copyrightowner.
healthcarespendingbygovernmentsandreal-worlddeploymentsof throughthetheoreticalframeworksthatareidentifiedfromliterature
MXR, it is critical to identify an agenda for future research to review.Thequalitativemethodologywastakentogatherresultsfrom
consider the ripple effect of immersive technologies on healthcare in-depth interviews with nine key informants. Then the discussion
services and facilities. The research aims to address this gap by lays down the key findings which are summarized with the
detailing a coherent framework to identify the roles and suggestions for future research in the conclusion. As a result, this
responsibilities of built environment experts as part of the research aims to help healthcare providers, built environment
multidisciplinary team effort for more effective implementation of experts, and policy makers respectively: (1) Advocate the benefits
MXR.Accordingly,threecriticalresearchquestionsariseasto: of MXR for innovating health and social care; (2) Spark debate
across networks of expertise to create health-promoting
(i) How does the MXR contribute to the advancement of
environment; and (3) Understand the overriding priorities in
healthcare services and facilities to improve population
makingeffectivepathwaystotheimplementationofMXR.
health and wellbeing in the post-pandemic era? Can built
environmentexpertsbenefit fromthe expansion ofMXR?
(ii) What are the risks and limitations that hamper a widescale
2. Related work
adoption of MXR in healthcare sector? Can built
environmentexpertsmitigateagainstsomeofthoseobstacles?
2.1. Objectives and search criteria
(iii) What are the roles and responsibilities of built environment
experts in creating a long-standing value chain of
This section provides the current context of academic and
healthcare premises undergoing transformation within the
industry perspectives on the MXR through an exploratory literature
futurehealthcare ecosystemsreformed byMXR?
review of prior research and cross-national case studies. Many
Toanswerthese,theresearchisorganizedintosixmainstages. researchers have called for a transdisciplinary culture to maximize
Followingtheintroduction,relatedworkestablishesthreehypotheses the potential of MXR (16, 33), however the merits of prior
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 03 frontiersin.org
Yang 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
FIGURE3
Googletrendsofhealthmetaversein2015–2022(30),showing(A)theregionalshareofinterestinhealthmetaverseandmetaverse;(B)theinterestover
timeinblockchain,telepresence,digitaltwin,andmetaverse.Reproducedwithpermissionofthecopyrightowner.
conceptualizations or methodologies to define the roles and typical usage contexts. The distinction between AR and VR is
responsibilities of built environment experts in this nascent made based on whether the physical environment is part of user
technological regime are still limited. Given that, this review strives experiences or not (7). Namely, AR with local presence can be
to determine the extent to which any interpretable pattern elicits implemented everywhere, whereas VR with telepresence is to be
the interrelations between MXR and built environment and their operated with Head-mounted Displays (HMDs) in specific
impactsonthefuturehealthcareecosystems. settings. Roughly speaking, MXR has three different modes of
The review commenced with Google Search Engine, Google operation: in-bed, in-lab, and surgical session (35–37). Although
Scholar, and reputable academic databases, then completed with the most prevalent modality of XR is still a mix of physical and
the last search on 15th August 2022. Since the most MXR virtual components, given the fact that in vivo exposure is yet
research has been published in conference papers (90.05%) rather inconvenient, expensive and time consuming, MXR will
than in journals (9.95%) (34), data was also collected from grey continuously replace and repeat the in vivo experience with
literature. The search terms included “XR”, “MXR”, and forms ofin silicocontact (38,39).
“Immersive Technologies” by limiting the results to the healthcare Many recent studies have focused on the roles of XR in
and AEC (Architecture, Engineering and Construction) industry. enhancing health and social care (15, 40, 41). But at the same
Only English language publications between 1990 and 2022 are time, XR continues to find a home in the built environment
considered to obtain globally recognized work while capturing the sector for healthcare facilities development (42–44). MXR’s
evolution of research topic. In light of research questions, the diverse opportunities can be categorized into eight domains: (a)
findings can be grouped into three arenas: (1) Cross-sectoral Enhancing surgical procedure and pain management; (b)
initiatives for Post-pandemic Resilience; (2) Interoperability and Advancing design, construction and management of healthcare
Usability of Next-gen Medicines; and (3) Metaverse and New facilities; (c) Training and educating healthcare professional and
FormsofValueinFutureHealthcareEcosystems. patient; (d) Diagnosing and treating disorder and pathology; (e)
Assisting physical impairment and rehabilitation; (f) Promoting
mental health and wellbeing; (g) Ensuring healthy living for the
2.2. Cross-sectoral initiatives for elderly; and (h) Analyzing health data (40, 42, 45–52). Table 1
post-pandemic resilience comprises MXR case studies based on their contemporaneity,
practicality, and implicationstothehealthcare built environment.
To avoid conceptual confusion and unclear demarcations, the A considerable number of MXR studies are published on
latest classification of XR-related technologies reviews their medical training, education, and practice (14, 53–55). Especially,
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 04 frontiersin.org
Yang 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
TABLE1 MXRopportunities.
Domain Projectdetails Opportunities Implicationsto built environment
(a) VR-NerveBlock,NorthumbriaNHS Feweropiatemedicationsduringsurgery Createvirtualspacetodistractpatients
Trust,UK(40)
(b) VRWalkthrough,Stantec,US(42) 360-degreetourhelpspeoplevisualizeclinicalspaces Reshapinghealthcaredesignpracticewithbetter
decision-making
(c) CTCAScanTraining,GE&Immerse,UK Simulationreducesonsitetraining,costs,andriskstopatients Substitutephysicalenvironmentwith24/7online
&US(45) access
(d) gameChange,NIHR,UK(46) Cognitive-behavioraltherapyforpatientswithpsychosis User-centereddesignofimaginalexposuretherapy
(e) Canetroller,Microsoft,US(47) Enablingpeoplewithvisualimpairmenttonavigatethrough UnhinderedareaforXRtrials
outdoor/indoorscenes
(f) Rechargerooms,MountSinai,US(48) Multi-sensoryexperiencetosupporthealthworkers Transformunderusedhospitalspaceinto
regenerativepurposes
(g) LookBack,VirtueHealth,UK(49) Reminiscencetherapyfordementiasufferers Physicalobjectsandspacecanenhanceexperience
(h) VROOM,WesternSydneyUniversity, Oncologydatamodelforpatient’scohort UnifiedenvironmentwithXR-relateddevicesand
Australia(50) technologies
XR can effectively treat mental health problems and behavior development of healthcare facilities can benefit from evidence-
disorders with a high degree of control over therapeutic based practices and participatory approaches using the various
experiences (38, 56–58). For example, Oxford Psychiatry has capabilities of MXR.
experimented with VR in helping people with psychosis. And an
automated cognitive-behavioral session benefited patients with
severe agoraphobic avoidance since it could be conducted in the 2.3. Interoperability and usability of
participant’s home(46). Moreover,MXRhas beensupportingthe next-gen medicines
wellbeing of frontline healthcare staff not just as a short-term
response to the pressure of working through backlogs, but as a Despite numerous benefits afforded by MXR, its development
long-term commitment to mitigating the global crisis of as an interoperable medicine faces several challenges. Medical
healthcareworkforce (59–62). interoperability refers to timely, secure, and seamless digital flow
ThesuccessfulXRadoptionmuststartwiththebuildingblocks for integrating electronic health data across different settings and
of infrastructure and ecosystems (63). For this, several studies systems for better patient experience and clinical outcome
highlight the importance of transdisciplinary collaboration with (71–73). It is anticipated that the horizontal convergence of
various experts across industries (53, 64). Particularly, the interoperability and portability for XR will be achieved by 2030
adoption of Participatory Design (PD) has been advocated to to ensure its wide-scale deployment in healthcare (74, 75). Yet,
foster an understanding of different needs between the optimizing XR opportunities in parallel to the healthcare
stakeholders in developing MXR applications (65). There are requirements on a global scale necessitates the coherent
many precedents of incorporating XR into the PD for designing frameworks of standardization to increase clinical interoperability
healthcare facilities to improve the workflow amongst various in currently unregulated and fragmented XR industry (76).
construction project teams (66–70). However, the reverse rarely Specifically, the importance of the Centers for Excellence has
exists. Most MXR publications do not suggest the potential been highlighted to exchange knowledge and methods for XR
contribution of built environment experts in contrast to the heavy solutions between healthcare providers, tech industries, and
involvement of computer scientists and product designers to solve academic researchers. This potential collaboration is concerned
complex medical challenges. In general, the XR ecosystems do not with addressing the most pressing issues such as global digital
sufficientlytakeintoaccountfeedbackfromtheAECindustry(34). exemplars, product development, quality assurance, procurement
Greenleaf, a neuroscientist at Stanford University’s Virtual frameworks, and distribution through virtual pharmacies (16, 39,
Human Interaction Lab, commented that many MXR consultants 72, 73, 75, 76). By considering all these, Table 2 analyzes the
are from the tech industry such as gaming or ITapplications. The risks and limitations when determining how best to incorporate
problem isthat they do not quite understand what istruly needed XR tothehealthcare sector.
for the XRecosystems in relationto the clinical environment (39). Further to that, how built environment experts can help to
Therefore, having a dialogue across multiple disciplines will help mitigate these issues will be examined in this stage by
them understand how technology can fit into the healthcare synthesizing research findings around the transdisciplinary effort
ecosystems without becoming a barrier. Based on these of achieving better user experiences through Human-Computer
observations, the first hypothesis as a conjectural statement to Interaction(HCI). Itis becausethatthesuccess ofMXR is highly
explainthefirstresearchquestionisformulatedasfollows. dependent on the qualityof ImmersiveMedia Experience (IMEx)
Hypothesis 1: MXR requires cross-sectoral initiatives to which is affected by Human Influential Factors (HIFs) such as
become an integral part of healthcare systems for post-pandemic “Immersion”, “Sense of Presence”, “Cybersickness”, as well as
resilience. Built environment experts can improve clinical mental and emotional status on the user viewpoint (77). And
environment to ensure the best use of MXR. In tandem, the identifying the use-related risks through psycho-physiological
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 05 frontiersin.org
Yang 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
TABLE2 MXRchallenges. architects for the design of individual buildings and urban
spaces. Kirsh, a Canadian cognitive scientist, compared the
Types Issues andmitigations
different approaches of architects and HCI practitioners by
Technicalevaluation (cid:129)Lackofdeviceusabilitymeasurementandprocedures
(16,39,75,76) →IntegrateXRproperties(ImageQuality,Human defining three different interfaces: circular interactivity for
Factors,Tracking) classical HCI, network interactivity with context aware, and
ClinicalValidation (cid:129)Lackofeffectiveclaimsandsafepremarketapplications architectural interactivity based on social and embodied ecology.
(16,39,76) →Controltrialswithclearlydefinedendpoints In his lecture titled “What Can HCI Learn from Architecture
ImplementationTime (cid:129)Delayinloading,troubleshooting,andlicensing about Interaction?”, it was proposed that high-dimensional
(39,72,73,75,76) →Betterconnectivityandstandardization
architectural conceptioncan beafertile ground forHCI (86).
CostandFunding (cid:129)Moreaffordabledevices,butcostisstillhigh
Mechanism →Diversifyfundingoptions Similarly,theconceptionofHuman-BuildingInteraction(HBI)
(16,75,76) has been introduced to address the complexity of human
Workforce(39,75) (cid:129)Lackofskilledworkforcetoprovidetechnicalsupport interactions with future built environment by implementing HCI
→Providecontentupdateandongoinglearning
principles into the domain of architecture and urban design (87)
Resistanceand (cid:129)Resistancetoadoptinnovativetechnology
(see Figure 4). Also, the dynamics of whole-body interactions
Pushback(39) →ProvideconclusiveevidenceofMXRefficacy
Governance (cid:129)Duplicatedeffortwithoutclearpathwaymapping and social encounters in public spaces were studied by architects
(16,75,76) →StandardizationandMedicalDevicesRegulations (88). The claims of these researchers are in line with the
DigitalEthics (cid:129)Cybersecurity,cyberprivacyandotherconsentissues principles of Freedman’s VR Exposure Therapy (VRET) that
(16,75,76) →Protectionofpersonalhealthdata(e.g.,XRSafety fosters a repertoire for coping with stressful social situations. In
Initiative,US)
addition, how XR can affect human-scale spatial experiences and
DigitalInequalities (cid:129)Systematicdigitalexclusionofdisadvantagedgroups
(16,75) →Improvedeviceownership,digitalliteracyandprecarity how digital and physical elements can be integrated in XR have
been examined by built environment specialists (89, 90). In 2020,
Arup proposed an incentivizing built environment that promotes
measures is vital not only to keep sustained growth but also to active lifestyles with greater digital adoption as preventive
justify further investment on MXR. Specifically,MXRexperiences approaches to wider health determinants. Here, the omnipresent
should emulate the real-life interactions as much as possible layer of technologies in a ubiquitous built environment will
through a superior user interface since “Cybersickness” is mainly empower people to take control of their own health and
caused by a discrepancy between the user’s visual and vestibular wellbeing (91). Based on these findings, the hypothesis derived
sensorysystems(53, 77–79). from thesecondresearchquestion is asfollows.
Those XR interactions can be defined by three criteria: Hypothesis 2: Human-Computer Interaction (HCI), a
relationship, collaboration, and engagement. And, based on these foundation of the MXR, is rigorously studied by architects for
criteria, it is identified that current XR interaction methods have optimal user experiences in the built environment. A confluence
six different types: tangible, collaborative, multimodal, device- of knowledge and methods from two sectors can achieve more
based, sensor-based, and hybrid (80). Among these, multimodal interoperable and usable MXR as the next-generation medicines
interactions provided in the MXR applications are particularly to reinforce the patient-centered and value-based models of
important to enable patients’ physical and mental healthneedsto healthand social care.
be closelyinterwoventhroughHCI.And the essence ofHCI is in
stimulating user’s cognitiveprocess with multi-sensoryexperience
through the tri-dimensional representation of virtual 2.4. Metaverse and new forms of value in
environment, which consists of two key elements: system future healthcare ecosystems
requirements and user concerns (78, 81, 82). In other words,
multimodal interactions can significantly increase the usability of EvenbeforetheCOVID-19pandemic,healthcaresystemswere
XR by the technologies of employing simultaneous human already going through transformation due to the shocks and
senses, but unfortunately those sensing technologies are still stresses induced by global issues such as climate change,
immature (83). Therefore, it is worth looking at other alternative demographic shifts, consumer expectations, and disruptive
measures to deal with such deficiency toward a more realistic technologies (92–94). And the way we interact with the built
representationofvirtual environment. environment has been changed by digital disruption, which led
VRforhealth-relatedresearchonhowindividualsperceiveand to the relocation and redesign of some forms of real estate (95).
respondtosurroundingenvironmentisinherentlyinterdisciplinary In the UK, most NHS properties face an unprecedented
(84).Spiegel,aleaderoftheworld’slargestvirtualmedicinelabsin challenge to keep up with Net-Zero aspirations with an ambition
California, US, explained about the MXR’s four therapeutic to reach 80% reduction by 2040 (96, 97). Besides, Integrated
mechanisms: promoting cognitive flow; dampening inner pain Care Systems (ICSs) aim to combine health and care services
signals; enhancing healthy body at tension; and strengthening through interoperable digital systems that require specialist
self-identity. Especially, strengthening self-identity is about estates capacity (98–100). Since 2013, the NHS Property Services
helping patients establish meaningful connections with the world has raised £418.5m through the disposal of 488 surplus
around them (85). In this regard, it is noteworthy that such properties because the strategic NHS estates planning is critical
socio-spatial aspects of HCI have been rigorously investigated by to generate not only a vital capital for the healthcare provision,
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 06 frontiersin.org
Yang 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
FIGURE4
ThreedimensionsofHBIresearch(87),illustratingthreeconcentriccirclesof“people”,“builtenvironment”,and“computing”todescribehowtheHBI
themescanoperatebetweenthreedimensions:physical,spatialandsocial.Reproducedwithpermissionofthecopyrightowner.
but also an efficient value chain by reallocating socio-economic fewervisitstohealthcarefacilities.Instead,moretherapeuticspaces
resources inatimelymanner (101). willincorporatenaturalelements intothe humanized andpersonal
Henceforth, the NHS estates will be put further into a wider space(89)(seeFigure5).
context in which healthcare premises will undergo significant Meanwhile, there has been a gradual transition towards more
alterations. In that sense, it is practically useful from a health virtual-oriented methods to complement traditional healthcare
economic perspective to envision how the healthcare facilities will systems. Digital Therapeutics (DTx), as a sub-category of the
evolve when MXR becomes an integral part of future healthcare Digital Health landscape, will bring the healthcare systems into a
ecosystems. As opposed to many digital technologies integrated to digital future with emphasis on cost efficiency and changing
healthcare, built environment does not necessarily make them fit- lifestyles (104–106). DTx are patient-facingsoftwareinterventions
for-purpose and thus not all buildings succeed in addressing two that can be tailored to individual’s needs by combining
critical needs of ageing populations: personal autonomy and prescribed medications with app-based systems. Since there is
inclusivity. Therefore, tofoster individual’s health and wellbeing in no need for physical logistics, DTx can complement the
the highly digitized healthcare systems, policies and interventions Decentralized Clinical Trials by allowing people access the
shouldentailanewdesignparadigmof“TherapeuticArchitecture” healthcare services regardless of time and place. In future,
to operate with people-centered and evidence-based discipline in the use of DTx will be widened by related technology such as
harmony with psychology and physiology (102, 103). In the same cloud-rendered XR, single-digit millisecond latency with edge
vein, Arup envisaged that increased remote care will result in computing, and real-timepredictiveanalytics (25, 107–111).
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 07 frontiersin.org
Yang 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
FIGURE5
Blueprints of future healthcare ecosystems (91), rendering (A) incentivizing and ubiquitous infrastructure platforms; (B) humanized and personal
healthcarebuiltenvironmentthatareenhancedbydigitaltechnologies,includingXR.Reproducedwithpermissionofthecopyrightowner.
Suchdigitallyenabledapproachesshouldworkintandemwith DTs of healthcare facilities can bring operational benefits such as
carefully designed physical infrastructure, urban space, and monitoring bed shortages and optimizing staff schedules (114).
buildings to deliver truly preventive healthcare services and Combined with Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence,
healthier lifestyles (89). As shown in Figure 6, the ecological DTs continue to evolve in healthcare and life sciences to provide
environment of DTx has been proposed by medical researchers to precision medicines as part of patient-centered care (115, 116).
support a sustainable business model of behavioral medicine for Eventually, MXR, DTx and DTs will become indispensable parts
obesity and eating disorders. DTx can be combined with online- of future healthcare ecosystems. On top of that, the healthcare
to-offline services within a ubiquitous environment of the future industry now seeks to enter a collective and incentivizing virtual
healthcare ecosystems (112). Here, the concept of creating environment, “the Metaverse”, which is accessible by immersive
“Enabling Spaces” such as green spaces and walkable communities technologies. “Metaverse” is a portmanteau word formed from
can tackle the noncommunicable chronic diseases and modifiable “Meta” and “Universe” and it has gained traction as a
lifestyle factors (113) by enhancing the efficacy of DTx, which is combinatorial innovation of flexible work styles and spatial
one of the key digital health modalities that require a technologies(27).
comprehensiveintegrationoftechnologyandbuiltenvironment. In 2021, Seoul National University Hospital gave lung cancer
The usability of DTx can be reinforced by MXR and Digital surgery training to the avatars of surgeons from around the
Twins (DTs). DTs can be used as the virtual representation of world through the 360°-8K-3D metaverse platform. This was to
target patients’ physiology for in silico clinical trials. And the meet the demand for non-face-to-face education during the
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 08 frontiersin.org
Yang 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
FIGURE6
Dtxecologyformodifiablebehaviors(112),showingfutureperspectivesfortheecologicalenvironmentofbehavioralmedicinethatleveragesdigital
technologies,includingXR.Reproducedwithpermissionofthecopyrightowner.
COVID-19 pandemic (117). Also, South Korean’s Metaverse the last hypothesis to be tested in relation to the third research
Doctors Alliance (MDA) adopted its own cryptocurrency as questionis asfollows.
payment method for the health services they provide. And the Hypothesis 3: With the rise of metaverse, XR will become a
MDA’s MetaClinic resembles the spatial layouts of real-world core component of digital health revolution to transform the way
hospitals to give a sense of familiarity that is strongly associated healthcare is practiced and delivered. More adaptive and
with human cognition (118). In 2022, the US’s Food and Drug inclusive approaches to the development of health-promoting
Administration (FDA) has hosted its own MXR programs to environment are essential for built environment experts to
approve key metaverse solutions (119). In particular, its embrace more decentralized, preventive, and therapeutic
economic profitability has been highlighted because the characteristics of thefuture healthcareecosystems.
metaverse will dramatically transform the healthcare sector by
innovating clinical education and patient care, but more
importantly, introducing monetization through blockchain, 3. Methodology
gamification,and Non-Fungible Tokens(NFTs) (120).
Whilst admitting that in-person consultations in a shared 3.1. Research design
immersive environment allow far more natural interactions and
collaborative treatments (121), the cautious approach, on the The research is designed to understand the most agreed body
contrary, warns about the risks of investing in many individual of knowledge and different accounts of MXR and their
health metaverses. It is because the metaverse has limited implications on built environment. Since the amount of MXR-
functionality in its current form although a quarterof population related data is currently limited, this research relies on two
will extend their physical activities to this digitally enhanced qualitative methodologies. An exploratory literature review was
virtual world by 2026 (27). Thus, it can be challenging to acquire chosen to identify the variables of theoretical frameworks to
a complete picture of how the metaverse will alter the future assess the research questions. To create continuity while bridging
landscape of health and care services. Nevertheless, there is one a gap in existing studies, those theoretical frameworks were used
consensus among researchers and practitioners on the short-term to formulate hypotheses, one from each thematic analysis of
outlook of healthcare metaverse; the future healthcare ecosystems related work, and provided directions for answering the research
need to strike the right balance of digital and in-person questions. Given the scarcity of research data, the purposes of
healthcare services (119, 122). In consideration of these points, interviews were to gather empirical evidence from participants
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 09 frontiersin.org
Yang 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
whocanprovidescientificnarrativesintothesituations,scenarios, and emails. The types of interviews depended on the availability
and processes ofMXRapplications inthehealthcare systems. of participants. All interviews were held in free-flowing settings
to uncover meaningful patterns of describing how MXR alters
(i) Exploratory literature review with a critical evaluation of
the healthcare services and facilities and how built environment
secondary data from the existing published work, including
experts can cope with the future healthcare ecosystems
peer-reviewed academic journals; statistical data from
transformed by MXR-related technological regimes. The
governmental reports, private sector research and surveys;
researcher produced written notes and completed transcripts of
and editedacademicandprofessional books.
video recordings to document the interviews. Findings were
(ii) Author’s own observations on primary data collected from
supplemented byfollow-up questionstothe participants.Sessions
individual, semi-structured, and in-depth interviews with
were carried out for 3 months, completed with the last one held
nine key informants, including industry experts and
onthe4thof August 2022.
academic scholars with specialties and professional
During the video or email interviews, participants were
backgrounds relating to the immersive technologies in
given a list of open-ended questions within predetermined
healthcare sector. thematic frameworks. Researcher asked participants’
experiences, context-rich personal accounts, and forward-
Figure 7 depicts the non-linear and iterative process of
implementingresearchfindingstoverifyhypotheses. looking perspectives about: (1) Interviewee’s expertise of
MXR; (2) Risks and limitations experienced by the
3.2. Data collection procedures and interviewee in MXR practices; (3) Interviewee’s understanding
participants on the relationship between MXR and built environment
where the technology is embedded; (4) Interviewee’s
The research proposal has been approved by the School of suggestions on how built environment experts can contribute
Sustainable Construction Ethics Committee. Due to the to the implementation of MXR; and (5) Potential MXR
restrictions concerning the COVID-19 pandemic, the author was applications in healthcare facilities the interviewee think it
advised to proceed with the online- and desk-based research may enable better healthcare practices and outcomes. Table 3
methods rather than adopting face-to-face fieldwork or large- summarizes the details of interviewees. The interviewees
scale survey. Consequently, semi-structured and in-depth encompass great expertise in business, healthcare, architecture,
interviews were conducted online, using video conferencing (VC) computer science, and robotics engineering.
FIGURE7
Qualitativeresearchprocess.
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 10 frontiersin.org
Yang 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
TABLE3 Listofinterviewees.
ID Date Type Field Backgrounds
(dd/mm/yyyy)
A 02.05.2022 Email Business FounderofaleadingBritishcompanyspecializedinXReventsforglobalaudiences,B2B/B2Csolutions,andVRsurgery
training
B 14.06.2022 VC Business DirectorofXRhub;KeynotespeakeratinternationalXRconferences;XRchairprofessorinBritishuniversity
C 04.07.2022 Email Healthcare FounderofMXRalliance;ManagingdirectorinaleadingAI-poweredmentalhealthplatformcompany;Former
technologydirectoratNHSfoundationtrust
D 05.07.2022 VC Architecture Computer-aideddesigntechnicianatNHSfoundationtrust;Freelancemetaversepropertydeveloper
E 11.07.2022 VC Computer Deputydirectorofdatascienceacademy;Co-founderofaleadingprototypingcompany;Computerscienceand
Science informationlecturerinBritishuniversity
F 15.07.2022 VC Architecture HealthcaredesigndirectorataleadingBritishconstructioncompany
G 25.07.2022 Email Healthcare Chairofmedicalmetaverseresearchassociation;Neurosurgeon;MedicalprofessorinSouthKoreanuniversity
H 29.07.2022 VC Architecture Founderofarchitecturalpracticedesigningvirtualenvironment;ArchitectureprofessorinSouthKoreanuniversity
I 04.08.2022 Email Computer VRdigitaldesignaccessibilityresearcher;HCIlecturerinBritishuniversity
Science
4. Results potential contribution to create physical environment that works
best for the MXR implementation. A founder of MXR alliance,
4.1. Data characteristics Interviewee C (IC) responded, “The built environment knowledge
andexpertiseareinherentintheskillsofthecodersanddesigners.
Thisresearchprocesspresentsqualitativefindingsbyprovidinga ThosewhobuiltXRsolutionshaveconsideredthemechanicsofthe
statement of in-depth interviews with nine key informants. The
builtenvironment.However,Ithinkthekeyhereis‘considered’.”IC
originalquotesandexamplesdrawnfrominterviewtranscriptswere thenremarkedthattheactiveparticipationofarchitectswillenhance
compiledasrawdata(seetheSupplementaryMaterial)beforethey theMXRapplicationsfurther.
werefurtheranalyzed.Allintervieweesremainanonymoustoensure In architectural practice, XR is being increasingly used for
their confidentiality and privacy. Supplemental evidence is provided the design and development of healthcare facilities. Interviewee
to support the interviewees’ contributions in determining whether F (IF), a healthcare design director of a leading construction
the phenomenon described in each hypothesis can be validated or company, sharedthe experience ofusing VRwalkthroughstohelp
nullified. As a result, the findings are classified into three thematic theclientunderstandwhatanewhospitallookslike.IFmentioned,
areas: (1) Synergism between Architecture and Technology; (2) “In many cases, the virtual tour is most effective when combined
Patient Empowerment and Staff Support; and (3) Scalable Health with full size mock-ups at 1:1 scale because people are familiar
andWellbeinginNon-hospitalandTherapeuticSettings. with neither two-dimensional drawings nor entirely virtual
environment.” Interviewee H (IH), a virtual space architect, uses
Immersive VirtualEnvironment (IVE)tosimulateoptimallighting
4.2. Synergism between architecture and design for workplace. IH said, “The same applies to healthcare
technology facilities as doctors also need offices, not to mention lighting as a
criticalelementforhospitaltopromotethepatient’swellbeing.”
MXR will contribute to the resilient healthcare systemsof the Another important point is that built environment can ensure
post-pandemic world by combining medical expertise with the best use of MXR. Interviewee I (II), a HCI researcher who
immersive experiences that go beyond the traditional healthcare develops an accessible virtual environment for visually impaired
provision. For the large-scale deployment of MXR, many people, explained that the earliest headsets with extra cables and
researchers and practitioners have highlighted the importance of sensors posed a huge risk to users. II elaborated, “Any SteamVR
three practical methods: cross-sectoral initiatives; evidence-based solutions using base stations cannot have reflection in the space.
design; and participatory approaches. Interviewee A (IA) is a Lighting conditions must be accurate, and normally these must be
founder of world-renowned XR company collaborating with placed in elevated positions for accurate tracking.” Even the most
various industry experts. In 2016, IA’s company launched the advanced HMDs can be susceptible to the level of “Neutrality” in
first global VR-content distribution platform for medical training test sites.IIadded,“Allkinds ofinside-outtracking HMDsshould
and education. IA advised, “If we investigate how XR can not be used outdoor or in contact with sunlight due to the riskof
improve the treatment of stress or anxiety, there should be an camera damage.” II was asked if he felt the need to collaborate
explanationastohowthisrelatestothe builtenvironment.” with built environment experts. “To a certain level yes. When
Althoughbuiltenvironmentexpertshavelongbeenapartofcross- workingwithbusinessIhadtoensurethatroomsweresuitable.”
sectoral initiatives to create clinical environments where healthcare Conversely,builtenvironmentexpertscanleverageMXR’sdata-
communitiescangrowandthrive,howevertheybarelygotalookin handling capacity for the evidence-based design of healthcare
on “the Growing Value of XR in Healthcare” (16, 39). Yet, facilities. In the MXR landscape, tracking sensor technology can
clarification is needed as to whether it is about the roles of built decide the usability of MXR as to the impact of physical
environment experts around the 3D visualization of space or their environment on digital world because it can collect and process
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 11 frontiersin.org
Yang 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
enormous data about the users and their surroundings (79). requirements will vary depending on the programs and stages of
Interviewee E (IE), a computer science and informatics professor healthcare facilities projects.” For this reason, many MXR
in British university, described how useful these sensors can be in pioneers advocated a representative and impartial network of
elucidating the relations in between people’s health, their lifestyles, academic institutions, researchers, healthcare providers, digital
and built environment. “We can think of a physical environment and creative industries to share skills and resources, while
which lets the robot and sensors function seamlessly and doesn’t avoiding duplications (126). Figure 8 illustrates the author’s
get in its way.” So, one could infer from this statement that the interpretation regarding the different domains and cross areas of
data collected from MXR sensors can be the basis of architectural traditionalstakeholdersandnewentrantsintheMXRecosystems.
designtoaidpeoplewithdisabilitiesordisorders. As mentioned earlier, Participatory Design (PD) is one of key
IE also urged, “Knowing what technologies are needed for the elements embedded in healthcare ecosystems. Interviewee F
houseisabigthing.Ithinkthat’swherethekeyisfor.Wehaveall elucidated that PD is not just necessary to cater for the different
these studies being done in the house for healthy aging or People needs of stakeholders in the healthcare ecosystems, but also
with Dementia (PwD). But I don’t think anybody has seriously mandatorytogetfundingformosthealthcarefacilitiesprojectsinthe
taken this.” In fact, the XR utilization via IoT platforms has been UK.IntervieweeB,achairprofessorofXRinBritishuniversityanda
developed under the umbrella concept, “Smart Home” or “Smart keynotespeakerofnumerousinternationalXRconferences,expanded
Cities” to enhance the elderly’s autonomy and independence in onthispoint,“Whenitcomestothealterationofbuiltenvironment
their lives (123, 124). Unfortunately, current practices remain at for XR implementation, it is important to understand multifarious
retrofitting guidelines for general homes rather than being specified demands from different stakeholders.” Specifically, before a
for living spaces with extensible technology adoption (125). On a comprehensive MXR infrastructure can be built, the targeted use
somewhatrelatednote,IntervieweeIproposed,“Healthcarefacilities cases and intended Return on Investment (ROI) must be qualified
need to involve tech experts who can suggest solutions to current overbothtimeandintent.Andbenchmarkmustbeoutlined(63).
procedures and practices that would save a lot of time and money,
andgreaterawarenessisneededtoachievethis.”
IntervieweeF(IF),anarchitect,wasaskedabouttheleadership 4.3.Patientempowermentandstaffsupport
potential and communication abilityof built environment experts
in engaging with a disparate group of stakeholders. IF replied, No matter how amazing health innovation may be, its long-
“Architects are only very small part of complex and extensive term integration into the systemsoften comes down to basic user
healthcare systems. Moreover, stakeholder dynamics and project experience. XR enables the quality of care by lowering the
FIGURE8
StakeholdersinMXRecosystems.
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 12 frontiersin.org
Yang 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
physicalimpactonthepatient,shorteningtheirrecoverytime,and The Hoag Centre for Advanced Visualization and Immersive
thereforeresulting in significant healthcaresavings(63). Also, XR Therapeutics (AVIT) in California uses patient-specific 360°
strengthens humanity in healthcare with an inner-centered models for patient engagement, pre-operative planning, and
conception of patient’s life (85). Interviewee I (II) shared an idea surgical rehearsal (130). In the UK, the Dental Public Health at
on this, “From years of collaborating with impaired users, I have the Wales University Dental Hospital (UDH) augmented
seen first-hand that XR can bring dramatic changes to someone’s patient’s experience with virtual characters and gamification
everyday life. However, XR is heavily underutilized for these (132). Interviewee E (IE) worked on this project in close liaison
kinds of practical implementations.” II continued, “VR devices with pediatric dentistry,public health consultants, digital learning
could be used as highly advanced visual accessibility aids to managers, and software developers. IE commented, “We gave
replace several existing tools and equipment that are relied on children a virtual tour by putting virtual characters who can
currently at a fraction of the cost.” In other words, the XR- speak to children so that they can get familiar with the
enabled healthcare transformation should be understood in the environment of dental clinic. At least, children have one less
context of far-reaching implications of the shift to more patient- thing to worry about.” This was indeed a good co-production of
centered and value-basedhealth and socialcare. virtual and physical healthcare facilities to demystify dental visits
TheessenceofMXRistheuserexperiencesthatcanbeenhanced by increasing patient’s confidence levels, thus making patient
through more engaging dialogues between patients and healthcare careeasierforclinicians.
providers, while allowing clinicians to focus on more urgent and Regarding the user experiences, another important aspect to
chronic health issues. Working with the NHS on specifying the consider is HCI which is the XR’s operation principle, enabling
user requirements of VR anxiety and depression treatment, interactive experiences in an immersive environment. Interviewee
Interviewee B emphasized,“The most desirable healthtechnology is I (II), a HCI scientist, was asked about the notion of HCI in
not the kind of cutting-edge ones. Clinicians welcome a novel relation to the built environment. II answered, “Since some
digital tool to save cost and time, to get better clinical outcomes, testing was done comparatively to physical elements, so a
and to make patients satisfied. If technology fails to make a huge recreation of the built environment was necessary. This
improvement compared to traditional health practices, it will get considered variables such as the luminosity levels and distance.
rejectedveryquickly.Costandperformancearethecriticalfactors.” To avoid the need of physical movement, distances could be
That being said, it would be remiss of us to neglect the XR’s manually manipulated in a controlled scenario that was a
practical problems, including laborious regulations, licensing replicationof the actual built environment.” This appears like the
restrictions, lack of rewarding payment methods, clinically way HCI is translated into HBI by architects as a theoretical
undeveloped technologies, and patient confidentiality regarding framework to understand “Usability” and “User-centric
health data (127, 128). By adopting Gartner’s well-known Hype Experience”. In other words, both architect and HCI scientist
Cycles of Digital Health, there are five distinct levels to describe have the same interpretation that “usability is ultimately about
the maturity of XR-related digital health technologies. Especially, avoiding frustrating theuser”(133)(see Figure 9).
the rigor of evidence-based decision-making founded on well- Toavoidunwantedside-effectsofMXR,onecriticalsolutionisto
constructed trials and data supporting best practice are essential emulatewhatgoesonintherealworld.InterviewG,aneurosurgeon
to escape the “Trough of Disillusionment” (128). Interviewee B who chairs the medical metaverse association in South Korean
indicated, “The current Hype of digital health technology is university, stated, “Avirtual clinic should be designed following the
positive in terms of attracting investment for research going layouts of actual consulting, examination, and treatment rooms
forward. But there are always very conservative people who are because they can become the deciding factors affecting patients’
reluctant todecide investment before theysee concreteevidence.” mental and emotional health.” Interviewee H (IH), an architect,
Therefore, a better understanding of clinical workflows, patient designed the virtual offices for a South Korean telecommunication
adherence characteristics, behavioral interventions, and more company. IH mentioned, “After a long discussion with our client,
importantly getting buy-in from both clinicians and patients are we decided to provide people with a familiar place rather than
business imperatives to widespread MXR (4, 127–130). Interviewee making it look so different from its real-life counterpart. The
B highlighted, “Marketizing XR requires a huge investment to train general design standards we’ve been using for physicalenvironment
and educate people to adapt to new digital health technologies. work well with our spatial cognition because they are proven with
Some serious investment decision will only be made on firm certaintythroughthe historyofarchitecture.” This could imply that
evidence. It will then finally lead to the alteration of physical architects should become more involved in, not just the
environment to accommodate any new requirements.” Particularly, coordination of physical settings to ensure MXR’s safety, but also
patientengagementisacriticalfactorwhendeterminingthesuccess thedesignofvirtualenvironmentitself.
of the XR-related interventions (63). For this reason, XR is used as
the reproductionofhumanbodyorhealthcarefacilitytofamiliarize
the patients with clinical environments or procedures, thus making 4.4. Scalable health and wellbeing in
patientsfeelmoreempowered.Theexamplesareasfollows. non-hospital and therapeutic settings
In the US, Stanford Virtual Heart pioneered XR to help
physicians treat cardiac patients more effectively by informing Digital disruption would generate new entrants, new business
people of the most complex congenital health problems (131). models and new locations (101). The amplified need for remote
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 13 frontiersin.org
Yang 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
FIGURE9
KeyusabilityelementsinHCIandHBI,comparingthreeelements(133)thatconstitutethedefinitionofusabilityinhuman-computerinteractionsand
human-buildinginteractions.
careduringtheperiodsofCOVID-19quarantineandisolationhas Virtual Reality (PRinVR) programs for more than three hundred
led to new business models such as the digital apps, providing lung cancer patients. IB replied to the interview question of
significant health benefits and commercial success (134). whether we can decide a certain kind of healthcare service is
Likewise, XR could easily be the greatest industry disruption more suitable for virtual migration than the other. “It will vary
healthcare has seen in over one hundred years (63). As a across the departments. The issue is greatly affected by the
computer-aided design technician at NHS foundation trust, requirements, financial status, and future directions of each
Interviewee D (ID) said, “We can learn from how e-commerce hospital department.” IB stressed that it will all boil down to a
changed the industry. They keep most of their logistics facilities. question of cost saving as well as better clinical outcome.
The healthcare sector will use Urban Air Mobility (UAM) to Interviewee F, a very experienced healthcare architect, forecasted,
reduce the cost and time associated with medical logistics. Small “We may end up with less clinical spaces, more therapeutic
and easy tasks can be delivered virtually. But large hospitals will spaces. In the hospital, there will be more soft spaces which can
always need to keep high-tech and heavy medical devices.” be easily relocated in comparatively low cost.” Also, there is a
Additionally, ID suggested that there will be more user-centric prediction on the percentage shift of health and careservicesthat
programs in the future hospitals, as digital and logistics ripe for significant virtual health migration by 2040, which will
technologies advance, just like many e-commerce business acceleratesuchtransformationalchanges(127).
modelsnowfocus oncustomerexperiences. In the US, many healthcare providers start reimagining the
Certainly,somehealthcareinfrastructurewillmigratefromthe future healthcare built environment to be designed around
status of in vivo to in silico. Henceforth, the future healthcare primary and community care (129). The aim is to coordinate all
ecosystems will have more decentralized, preventive, and health-related issues by multidisciplinary teams in readiness for
therapeutic characteristics. Interviewee B commented, “XR the transition of healthcare systemsand services. Focusing on the
extends health-promoting spaces and opportunities for more prediction and prevention of diseases, advances in digital health
people. Currently, healthcare providers encourage people to come will shift both operations and leadership from hospital-level care
to the medical center or do it online. If people do not come, it to the home or community surgical centers. And chronic disease
will incur a cost anyway. Hospitalization and the expense of management programs that are not anchored to a hospital or
inpatient treatment are astronomical from the government’s clinic will be more taken by MXR. Meanwhile, a visionary model
perspective. That is why preventive care is so important. for the optimization of health resources was awarded the 2021
Government wants to keep people healthy.” Therefore, more Wolfson Economics Prize in the UK. This work suggests that XR
adaptive, and inclusive approaches should be taken by built will enable the healthcare industry to overcome geographical
environment experts to embrace those characteristics in restrictions, future hospitals will exist as virtual space with
developing a health-promoting environment. This could range physical outposts in community locations. Consequently, only
from introducing an exclusive space to ensure the best use of the services that cannot be digitized will remain at the large
MXR to redefining the relationships between existing and new acute hospitals (135,136).
healthcare premises. SuchprojectionsareinlinewiththecentralaimofICSstojoin
IntervieweeB(IB)hasbeenworkingwiththeNHSonseveral uphospitalsandcommunity-basedservicesaspartnershipsacross
mental health projects,including thePulmonary Rehabilitation in different organizations and settings (137, 138). Similarly, Arup
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 14 frontiersin.org
Yang 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
proposedthatfuturehealthcareecosystemswillbe“smaller,better approaches, which have long been the common denominators of
connected,andstrategicallydispersedincities,withastrongerlocal two disciplines. The reproducible, replaceable, and interactive
presence and identity”. A better data connectivity and characteristics of XR can reinforce the provision of health and
interoperability will enable these alternative healthcare facilities social care, especially when its scalability is imperative amid
to implement more domestic, natural, and therapeutic elements public health crises. During the research, XR-enabled advantages
for bespoke patient experiences by accommodating new lifestyles for built environment experts were readily identifiable as to the
and demographic factors. And eventually, they will challenge the development of healthcare facilities. In contrast, their potential
designconventions oftraditionalhealthcare premises (89). contributions to the advancement of MXR for post-pandemic
Interviewee E, a robotic scientist, shared the vision of future resilience have been largelyoverlooked.
built environment from an engineering point of view. “The more This could be because the MXR ecosystems consist mainly of
you overcrowd, the less ability you give any technology. healthcare providers, software/hardware engineers, and digital
Anything moving around and you’re looking around, you can content creators. The other reason is that MXR practitioners
crash into things that are less space free to move around. This generally lack understanding of how built environment experts
comes from sci-fi, there’s sort of truth in what they build. can underpin the operation of MXR. Research participants shed
Robotics and everything require a kind of clean, smooth, and light on this reciprocal relationship between MXR and the built
quite minimalistic environment. You need a lot more environment. For better patient experiences and health outcomes,
minimalistic environment in a big space.” This could imply that the current modality of MXR applications needs to keep certain
emerging technologies such as XR involving IoT sensors, will not environmental factors under control. This necessitates
only become useful tools for healthcare services, but also pave architectural interventions to ensure the efficacy of MXR. Also,
the way for future healthcare ecosystems that necessitate a the analysis shows that leveraging the capacity of MXR for
changeof concept indesigninghealthcare facilities. collecting user-specific health and lifestyle data can complement
Interviewee D (ID) is also a freelance metaverse property the evidence-based design of any health-promoting built
developer. When it comes to the design of healthcare facilities in environment including healthcare facilities. For these reasons, it
metaverse, ID said, “Architects can have more freedom to design, would benefit both MXR and built environment communities to
invest, and develop some cool experiences for people as we raise awareness towards the need of more coherent framework
understand what the human-centered design is. This is the way I for participatoryapproachesto caterfor the different demands of
perceive the virtual environment; we are shaping the experiences stakeholders (seeFigure10).
in it.” Opinions diverged greatly on the design of virtual clinics.
A neurosurgeon, Interview G mentioned,“The medical metaverse 5.1.2. Patient empowerment and staff support
refers to not just a visually experiential space, but also a new The second research question investigated the challenges
spatiotemporal layer in which Clinician-Patient, Clinician- posed by MXR and whether built environment experts can
Clinician, and Trainer-Trainee can communicatewith eachother. alleviate those problems. This has been made into the second
The concept of medical metaverse should be a more profound hypothesis that a collective effort by MXR and built
yet practical version than ones for games or entertainment. In environment communities can increase the interoperability
that sense, the use of avatar or spatial layouts are not the critical and usability of MXR as the next-gen digital medicine. Whilst
issues.” In the US, Cannon Design proposed “Virtual Care the exploratory literature review focused on collecting
Modules” as mission control centers for clinicians to make evidence of administrative complexities or technical huddles
virtual visits as a preparation fora shift from in-person tovirtual to the MXR implementation, the qualitative data analysis of
care. In parallel, physical facilities will need digital pods for one- interviews specified practical problems where the practical
on-one sessions and larger spaces for the care teams to replicate skill sets of built environment experts can be used
virtualand physical activities (139). appropriately, and ultimately how it can facilitate the patient-
centered and value-based models of health and social care. As
a result, patient empowerment and staff support through
5. Discussion user-centered experiences were identified as the ultimate
purposes of MXR.
5.1. Key findings ItwasclearfromcasestudiesthatXRasthereproductionof
human body or healthcare facility can effectively increase the
5.1.1. Synergism between architecture and patients’ understanding along the medical procedures, thus
technology making them less burdensome for the clinicians. System
The first research question was about the opportunities requirements and user concerns are two key aspects to
presented by MXR and whether built environment experts can understand how HCI enables XR’s multi-sensory experience in
benefit from them. This leads to the first hypothesis that the virtual environment. Among the XR’s therapeutic mechanisms,
synergism between architecture and technology will take on strengthening patient’s self-identity through HCI can
added significance as some healthcare resources will migrate significantly improve the usability of MXR. Since architects
from the status of in vivo to in silico. The process involves cross- have rigorously studied HCI as to the user-centered
sectoral initiatives, evidence-based design, and participatory experiences, a confluence of knowledge and methods on HCI
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 15 frontiersin.org
Yang 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
FIGURE10
1sthypothesisverification.
will benefit both MXR and built environment sectors. 5.1.3. Scalable health and wellbeing in
Additionally, XR needs to mimic reality as much as it can to non-hospital and therapeutic settings
prevent the occurrence of any unwanted side-effects such as The third research question was to examine the roles and
“Cybersickness”. In this regard, the analysis suggests that the responsibilities of built environment experts in constructing a
ability of built environment experts, especially architects, can long-standing value chain of healthcare premises that will be
be extended to the creation of virtual environment by bringing transformed by the nascent XR regime. The third hypothesis
their expertise on spatial organization and its implications on posits that XR will foster more decentralized, preventive, and
humanphysiologyandpsychology(seeFigure11). therapeutic characteristics in the future healthcare ecosystems.
FIGURE11
2ndhypothesisverification.
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 16 frontiersin.org
Yang 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
FIGURE12
3rdhypothesisverification.
Since each characteristic would induce the alteration of physical The study would therefore have benefitted from the XR’s
settings, built environment experts should take more adaptive sustainabilityaspectsininvestigatinghowalong-standingvaluechain
and inclusive approaches to the planning and design of of healthcare premises can be generated in relation to the MXR-
healthcare facilities. XR-enabled digital disruption will accelerate induceddisruption.AlthoughitispresumedthatMXRcouldbepart
decentralized healthcare services by spatially dispersed and of a circular economy for the sustainable growth of healthcare
specialized facilities with a strong local presence. Also, there will industry, however this aspect remains unverifiable at present due to
be a “Virtual Migration” of some healthcare services just as we thelackofempiricaldataconcerningMXR-relatedconsumptionand
have seen how e-commerce reshaped the real estate industry productionstrategiesforenergy,labor,andmaterials.
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Further analysis, however, Inaddition,qualitativedatawascollectedfromarelativelysmall
revealed that the healthcare industry will not exactly follow the sample size. This would mean that research quality is somewhat
same pattern because in-person consultations and in-patient dependent on participant’s different set of values and expectations
treatmentsatthelarge acute hospitals willstill beindispensable. about the present state and future prospect of MXR. Thus, further
Additionally,XRwillstrengthentheefficacyofDTxwhichoffers evidence addressing the long-term implications of MXR on both
precise and preventive medicine. As part of the treatment, DTx healthcare and built environment systems would be required to
requires the so-called “Enabling Spaces” for promoting active and generalizethefindingsbeyondtheresearchboundaries.
healthy lifestyles. Hence, built environment experts should support
the future healthcare systems by creating more therapeutic
architecture to invigorate individual’s wellbeing as opposed to the 6. Conclusion
conventional design of existing healthcare facilities. Lastly, the data
suggestedthatXR-relatedtechnologiessuchasIoTsensorsandUAM This qualitative research has strived to examine the
willalsoaffectthewayhealthcarepremisesaredesigned.Regardinga implications of XR on healthcare systems and built
novel concept of “Healthcare Metaverse”, it was identified that the environments. Also, the research has identified how built
balanceofdigitalandin-personhealthcareservicesformoreefficient environment experts can manage the XR-enabled innovation for
clinicalworkflowswillbecomeacriticalmatterastothedevelopment healthcare in a more structured and deliberate way. Since most
ofvirtualclinicsorhealthcareplatformsinmetaverse(seeFigure12). healthcare capital projects take considerable time to complete, a
pre-emptive approach should be taken to the wide-scale
implementation of XR so that the healthcare systems can ensure
5.2. Research gaps and limitations resilience in a post-pandemic future. Three questions have been
answered through the process of implementing research findings
Recently, the UN’s Sustainable Development Goal (SDGs), the toverifyhypotheses.
Environmental,SocialandGovernance(ESG)commitments,andthe Firstly, despite an inadequate recognition of built environment
large-scale digitization have become three megatrends to evaluate experts’potentialcontribution,bothbuiltenvironmentandhealthcare
investment opportunities for the post-COVID economic recovery. sectors can benefit from the synergism between architecture and
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 17 frontiersin.org
Yang 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
technologybyleveragingthevariouscapabilitiesofXRthroughcross- Data availability statement
sectoral initiatives, evidence-based practices, and participatory
approaches.Secondly,aconfluenceofknowledgeandmethodsoftwo
Theoriginalcontributionspresentedinthestudyareincluded
sectorscanimprovepatientempowermentandstaffsupportthrough
in the article/Supplementary Material, further inquiries can be
twotheoreticalframeworks:Human-ComputerandHuman-Building
directed tothecorresponding author.
interactions.TheincreasedinteroperabilityandusabilityofXRasthe
next-generation medicine will enhance the patient-centered and
value-based models of health and social care. Thirdly and lastly, the Ethics Statement
XR-enabled technological regime including healthcare metaverse will
largely affect the forms of value in healthcare premises by fostering
This study was reviewed and approved by the School of
more decentralized, preventive, and therapeutic characteristics in the
Sustainable Construction Ethics Committee. Written informed
futurehealthcareecosystems.Therefore,moreadaptive,andinclusive
consentwasobtainedfromtheparticipantstoparticipateinthisstudy.
approaches should be taken by built environment experts for the
creation of a health-promoting environment in contrast to the
conventionaldesignlanguageofhealthcarefacilities. Author contributions
After all, this is ultimately about how to improve resource
efficiency in the healthcare sector as a preparation for a The author confirms being the sole contributor of this work
paradigm shift caused by using XR. That is to say, the transition
and hasapproveditfor publication.
of health resources from the status of in vivo to in silico should
be factored into the process of establishing healthcare
infrastructure which takes enormous time and concerted effort. Acknowledgments
To conclude, the following suggestions are made for XR-related
research and practice hereafter in both healthcare and built The author expresses special appreciation to Professors
environment sectors. Evangelia Chrysikouand Andrew Edkins from University College
London for their help and feedback. The author would like to
(i) Only a little has been written on the XR’s sustainability, thank all interview participants for their generosity, insightful
relying on a conjecture that its immateriality and guidance, and constructivefeedback providedonthisresearch.
reproducibility helps control pollution by reducing waste and
encouraging recycling. To be exact, the intersection of
intangible services promoting clinical efficiency and tangible Conflict of interest
assets ensuring therapeutic environment is where MXR can
flourish. Just as a circular economy culture has been The author declares that the research was conducted in the
integrated into the development of Net-Zero hospitals, XR- absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
enabled technological regimes should also take sustainability- beconstrued asapotential conflictofinterest.
oriented approaches to seek inter-sectoral solutions for a
“CleanGrowth” of MXR.
Publisher’s note
(ii) Somearguethattheskillsetsofbuiltenvironmentexpertswill
be seriously devalued and undermined in the virtual world
thatdefiesthelawof physics and spatialdesign principles in Allclaimsexpressedinthisarticlearesolelythoseoftheauthors
the real world. However, this would hardly be the case for anddonotnecessarilyrepresentthoseoftheiraffiliatedorganizations,
their roles in reinforcing the efficacy of MXR because: (1) orthoseofthepublisher,theeditorsandthereviewers.Anyproduct
Even highly digitized healthcare systems will still require the thatmaybeevaluatedinthisarticle,orclaimthatmaybemadebyits
“Offline Networks of Therapeutic Environment”; and (2) manufacturer,isnotguaranteedorendorsedbythepublisher.
Whether it is virtual or physical, our healthcare systems
have placed great emphasis on the rigor of evidence-based
Supplementary material
approach linking health outcome to a clinical environment.
Henceforth, built environment experts should seek closer
ties with the MXR ecosystems to make a real business case The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
for the “Co-production” of scalable health and wellbeing in online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmedt.2023.
non-hospital andtherapeutic settings. 1184925/full#supplementary-material
References
1. NHS. New care models: Harnessing technology. London: NHS Providers 2.CharlesA,EwbankL.Theroadtorenewal:Fiveprioritiesforhealthandcare.
(2017).p.6–22.Availableat:https://nhsproviders.org/media/3416/new-care-models- London: The King’s Fund (2021). Available at: https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/
harnessing-technology_final.pdf(AccessedMarch1,2023). publications/covid-19-road-renewal-health-and-care(AccessedMarch1,2023).
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 18 frontiersin.org
Yang 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
3.RCN.Principlesforreturntoservice—staffrecoveryandpatientsafety.London: com/industries/healthcare-systems-and-services/our-insights/from-facility-to-home-
RoyalCollegeofNursing(2021).Availableat:https://www.rcn.org.uk/about-us/our- how-healthcare-could-shift-by-2025(AccessedMarch1,2023).
influencing-work/position-statements/principles-for-return-to-service (Accessed
24.NHS.Supportinginformation:Virtualwardincludinghospitalathome.London:
March1,2023). NHS(2022).p.1–10.Availableat:https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/
4.Allianz.COVID-19:Howitacceleratedthefutureofhealthcare.London:Allianz 2021/12/B1478-supporting-guidance-virtual-ward-including-hospital-at-home-march-
Partners (2022). pp. 4–30. Available at: https://health.allianzcare-publications.com/ 2022-update.pdf(AccessedMarch1,2023).
story/howcovid19acceleratedthefutureofhealthcare/page/1(AccessedMarch1,2023).
25.GreenleafW,RobertsL,FineR.Appliedvirtualrealityinhealthcare:Casestudies
5. GOV.UK. A plan for digital health and social care. London: GOV.UK (2022). andperspectives.Washington,DC:CoolBlueMediaandInternationalVirtualReality
Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/a-plan-for-digital-health- HealthcareAssociation(IVRHA)(2022).3–7.
and-social-care(AccessedMarch1,2023).
26.FDA.Medicalextendedrealityprogram:Researchonmedicalextendedreality-
6.MilgramP,TakemuraH,UtsumiA,KishinoF.Augmentedreality:aclassof based medical devices. Silver Spring, MD: U.S. Food and Drug Administration
displays on the reality-virtuality Continuum. Soc Photo-Opt Instrum Eng (SPIE). (2021).Availableat:https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/medical-device-regulatory-
(1994)2351:282–92.doi:10.1117/12.197321 science-research-programs-conducted-osel/medical-extended-reality-program-
research-medical-extended-reality-based-medical-devices(AccessedMarch1,2023).
7.RauschnabelP, FelixR,HinschC,Shahab H,AltF.WhatisXR?Towards a
framework for augmented and virtual reality. J Comput Hum Behav. (2022) 27. Gupta A. What is a metaverse? London: Gartner insights information
133:1–18.doi:10.1016/j.chb.2022.107289 technology article (2022). Available at:https://www.gartner.com/en/articles/what-is-
a-metaverse?utm_medium=social&utm_source=linkedin&utm_campaign=SM_GB_
8.LlamasS.XRbythenumbers:whatthedatatellsUS.SantaClara,CA:SuperData
YOY_GTR_SOC_SF1_SM-SWG&utm_content=&sf259129703=1 (Accessed March
(2019). Available at: https://www.slideshare.net/AugmentedWorldExpo/stephanie-
1,2023).
llamas-superdata-xr-by-the-numbers-what-the-data-tells-us (Accessed March 1,
2023). 28. OrrE.Themetaversecancreateaboundlesshealthcareexperience.Boston,MA:
9.BelliniH,SugiyamaM,ShinM,TakayamaD.Profilesininnovation:Virtual& Forbes Technology Council (2022). Available at: https://www.forbes.com/sites/
forbestechcouncil/2022/01/26/the-metaverse-can-create-a-boundless-healthcare-experience/
augmented reality, understanding the race for the next computing platform. New
York, NY: Goldman Sachs Global Investment Research (2016). p. 1–27. Available ?sh=4b1e4a822340(AccessedMarch1,2023).
at: https://www.goldmansachs.com/insights/pages/technology-driving-innovation- 29. Rosenberg L. Even though it’s virtual, the metaverse does actually impact
folder/virtual-and-augmented-reality/report.pdf(AccessedMarch1,2023). the environment. New York, NY: World Economic Forum (2022). Available
at: https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2022/02/how-metaverse-actually-impacts-the-
10.BloombergUK.ARAndVRinhealthcaremarketsizetoreachUSD14.06billion
environment/(AccessedMarch1,2023).
in2030|risingdemandforroboticsurgeriesowingtoability.Bloomberg,UK:Business
(2022). Available at: https://www.bloomberg.com/press-releases/2022-02-10/ar-and- 30. Google. Google trends in health metaverse worldwide 2012–2022. Mountain
vr-in-healthcare-market-size-to-reach-usd-14-06-billion-in-2030-rising-demand-for- View, CA: Google Trends (2022). Available at: https://trends.google.co.uk/trends/
robotic-surgeries-owing-to-ability(AccessedMarch1,2023). explore?date=2012-01-01%202022-07-23&q=health%20metaverse (Accessed March
1,2023).
11.KoumaditisK,MousasC,ChinelloF.XRintheeraofCOVID-19.JBehavInf
Technol.(2021)40(12):1234–6.doi:10.1080/0144929X.2021.1988320 31.MarrB.Extendedrealityinhealthcare:Threereasonstheindustrymustgetready
for AR and VR. Boston,MA: Forbes (2021). Available at:https://www.forbes.com/
12.OngT,WilczewskiH,PaigeS,SoniH,WelchB,BunnellB.Extendedrealityfor
sites/bernardmarr/2021/06/14/extended-reality-in-healthcare-3-reasons-the-industry-
enhancedtelehealthduringandbeyondCOVID-19:viewpoint.JMIRSeriousGames.
(2021)9(3):1–31.doi:10.2196/26520 must-get-ready-for-ar-and-vr/?sh=3ea516ce73a4(AccessedMarch1,2023).
13.GilbertN.Climatechangewillforcenewanimalencounters—andboostviral 32.MarrB.Theamazingpossibilitiesofhealthcareinthemetaverse.Boston,MA:
Forbes (2022). Available at: https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2022/02/23/
outbreaks.Nature.(2022)605(7908):20.doi:10.1038/d41586-022-01198-w
the-amazing-possibilities-of-healthcare-in-the-metaverse/?sh=745589339e5c (Accessed
14.PearsM,YiasemidouM,BiyaniC.Roleofimmersivetechnologiesinhealthcare March1,2023).
educationduringtheCOVID-19epidemic.ScottMedJ.(2020)65(4):112–9.doi:10.
33.MathewR,MushtaqF.Theroleofimmersivetechnologyinhealthcaretraining
1177/0036933020956317
&education:threeprinciplesforprogress.BMJSimulTechnolEnhancLearn.(2021).7
15.HEE.Enhancingeducation,clinicalpracticeandstaffwellbeing.Anationalvision (5):459–60.doi:10.1136/bmjstel-2021-000881
for the role of simulation and immersive learning technologies in health and care.
34.StalsA,CaldasL.StateofXRresearchinarchitecturewithfocusonprofessional
L
(2
o
0
n
2
d
0
o
)
n
.
:
p.
N
3
H
–
S
39
H
.
e
A
a
v
lt
a
h
ila
E
b
d
le
uc
a
a
t
t
:
io
h
n
ttp
E
s
n
:/
g
/
l
w
an
w
d
w.h
T
e
e
e
c
.
h
n
n
h
o
s.
l
u
o
k
g
/
y
sit
E
e
n
s/
h
d
a
e
n
fa
c
u
ed
lt/fi
L
l
e
e
a
s
r
/
n
do
in
c
g
um
(T
en
E
t
L
s
)
/
practice—asystematicliteraturereview.JArchitSciRev.(2022)65(2):138–46.doi:10.
1080/00038628.2020.1838258
National%20Strategic%20Vision%20of%20Sim%20in%20Health%20and%20Care.pdf
(AccessedMarch1,2023). 35. Bialasiewixz K. Patient wearing virtual reality glasses. Brentwood, TN:
16.KilkellyF,O’BrienR,TichoS.ThegrowingvalueofXRinhealthcareintheUK. Dreamstime (2018).Available at:https://www.dreamstime.com/stock-photo-patient-
wearing-virtual-reality-glasses-young-trauma-hospital-image91336336 (Accessed
XRhealthUK.London:UKResearchandInnovation,HealthEducationEngland,and
March1,2023).
Rescape Innovation Ltd. (2021). Available at: https://www.xrhealthuk.org/the-
growing-value-of-xr-in-healthcare#References(AccessedMarch1,2023). 36.IsaacJ,KumarM,ManivannanM.Effectofvisualawarenessoftherealhandon
user performance in partially immersive virtual environments: presence of virtual
17.SollofJ.BabylonlaunchesAI-poweredtriagetoolinRwanda.London:Digital kinesthetic conflict. Int J Hum Comput Interact. (2020) 36(16):1540–50. doi: 10.
Health (2021). Available at: https://www.digitalhealth.net/2021/12/babylon-ai-
1080/10447318.2020.1768667
powered-triage-tool-rwanda/(AccessedMarch1,2023).
37.MorimotoT,KobayashiT,HirataH,OtaniK,SugimotoM,TsukamotoM,etal.
18.Broomx.Improvingtheemotionalwellbeingofhealthprofessionals.Barcelona:
XR(extendedreality:virtualreality,augmentedreality,mixedreality)technologyin
Broomx Technologies (2021). Available at: https://broomx.com/sectors/healthcare/
spine medicine: status quo and quo vadis. J Clin Med. (2022) 11(2):470. doi: 10.
enhancing-medical-professionals-psychological-well-being(AccessedMarch1,2023).
3390/jcm11020470
19.Deloitte.Connectedhealth:Howdigitaltechnologyistransforminghealthand
social care. London: The Deloitte Centre for Health Solutions (2015). p. 4–35. pr 3 es 8 c . r W ipt h io it n eM fo , r Y “ e n o at N ur , e V ”— as t s h il e jev po P t , en L t u ia n l ds o te f d u t s R in , g W v a i l r l t e u rg al ard na M tu , re Al i b n in th M er , a e p t eu a t l. ic A s.
Available at: https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/uk/Documents/life- JNeuropsychiatrDisTreat.(2018)14:3001–13.doi:10.2147/NDT.S179038
sciences-health-care/deloitte-uk-connected-health.pdf(AccessedMarch1,2023).
39.GreenleafW.Waltergreenleafondigitaltherapeutics,AR/VR,andsensor-driven
20.WalkerM.Healthcarein2030:Goodbyehospital,hellohome-spital.NewYork,
health.Wearabletech,digitalhealth,andneurotechconference.Stanford,CA:Applysci
NY: World Economic Forum (2016). Available at: https://www.weforum.org/
(2020). Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SYpvfPiTy6Q (Accessed
agenda/2016/11/healthcare-in-2030-goodbye-hospital-hello-home-spital/ (Accessed
March1,2023).
March1,2023).
40. NHS. The health trust using immersive experiencesto guide patientsthrough
21. Singhal S, Kayyali B, Levin R, Greenberg Z. The next wave of healthcare
surgery.TyneandWear:NHSNorthumbriaHealthcare(2020).Availableat:https://
innovation: The evolution of ecosystems. Chicago, IL: McKinsey & Company
Healthcare Systems & Services Practice (2020). p. 1–13. Available at: https://www. www.northumbria.nhs.uk/the-health-trust-using-immersive-experiences-to-guide-
patients-through-surgery/#8ca698d7(AccessedMarch1,2023).
mckinsey.com/industries/healthcare-systems-and-services/our-insights/the-next-wave-
of-healthcare-innovation-the-evolution-of-ecosystems(AccessedMarch1,2023). 41. NHS. The future of healthcare: Cutting though the complexity to deliver real
22.SinghH,ArmasA,LawS,TangT,GrayC,CunninghamH,etal.Howdigital impact, immersive technology in healthcare: the rise of AR, VR and MR. Leicester:
health solutions align with the roles and functions that support hospital to home NHS Arden and Greater East Midlands (2021). p. 2–8. Available at: https://www.
transitions for older adults: a rapid review study protocol. BMJ Open. (2021) 11 ardengemcsu.nhs.uk/media/2274/ardengem-digital-horizons_2021_news-story-version.
(2):1–10.doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2020-045596 pdf(AccessedMarch1,2023).
23.BestsennyyO,ChmielewskiM,KoffelA,ShahA.Fromfacilitytohome:How 42. O’regan J. Why VR matters in healthcare design. London: Stantec (2020).
healthcare could shift by 2025. New York, NY: McKinsey & Company Healthcare Available at: https://www.stantec.com/uk/ideas/with-video-why-vr-matters-in-
Systems & Services Practice (2022). p. 1–11. Available at: https://www.mckinsey. healthcare-design(AccessedMarch1,2023).
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 19 frontiersin.org
Yang 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
43.PrabhakaranA,MahamaduA-M,MahdjoubiL.Understandingthechallengesof 64.ZweifachS,TriolaM.Extendedrealityinmedicaleducation:drivingadoption
immersivetechnologyuseinthearchitectureandconstructionindustry:asystematic throughprovider-centereddesign.JDigitBiomarkers.(2019)3:14–21.doi:10.1159/
review.JAutomConstr.(2022)137:1–18.doi:10.1016/j.autcon.2022.104228 000498923
44. Safikhani S, Keller S, Schweiger G, Pirker J. Immersive virtual reality for 65.KnightI,WestJ,MatthewsE,KabirT,LambeS,WaiteF,etal.Participatory
extending the potential of building information modeling in architecture, design to create a VR therapy for psychosis. J Des Health. (2021) 5(1):98–119.
engineering,andconstructionsector:systematicreview.IntJDigitEarth.(2022)15 doi:10.1080/24735132.2021.1885889
(1):503–26.doi:10.1080/17538947.2022.2038291
66.AndersenS,BrobergO,HavnE,ErlingC.Participatorysimulationinhospital
45.HealthySimulationWritingTeam.HowimmerseVRishelpingradiologistslearn work system design. Taastrup: Technical Information Center of Denmark
life-saving x-ray tech. Las Vegas, NV: HealthySimulation.com (2020). Available at: (2016). p. 2–225. Available at: https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/84003049.pdf
https://www.healthysimulation.com/27355/immerse-vr-x-ray-simulator (Accessed (AccessedMarch1,2023).
March1,2023).
67. Reijula J, Ruohomäki V, Lahtinen M, Reijula K. Participatory facility design
46.FreemanD,LambeS,KabirT,PetitA,RosebrockL,YuL-M,etal.Automated challenges in two university hospitals. J Intell Buildings Int. (2017) 12(1):3–16.
virtual realitytherapytotreatagoraphobic avoidance anddistressin patientswith doi:10.1080/17508975.2017.1342591(AccessedMarch1,2023).
psychosis (gameChange): a multicentre, parallel-group, single-blind, randomised,
68. Harkness R, McIntosh J, Marques B. Using virtual reality and participatory
controlled trail in England with mediation and moderation analyses. Lancet
Psychiatry.(2022)9:375–88.doi:10.1016/S2215-0366(22)00060-8 p
a
r
r
o
ch
ce
it
s
e
s
c
e
t
s
u
t
r
o
al
d
s
e
c
s
i
i
e
g
n
n
ce
in
a
te
ss
r
o
st
c
i
i
t
a
ia
ti
l
on
h
,
ea
(
l
2
th
01
ca
8
r
)
e
.p
p
.
la
6
c
5
e
7
s.
–
5
6
2
3
n
.
d
Av
In
ai
t
l
e
a
r
b
n
l
a
e
ti
a
o
t
n
:
a
h
l
tt
c
p
o
s
n
:/
f
/
e
a
r
n
en
z
c
a
e
sc
o
a
f
.n
t
e
h
t
e
/
47.ZhaoY,BennettC,BenkoH,CutrellE,HoltzC,MorrisM,etal.Enablingpeople wp-content/uploads/2019/01/77-Using-Virtual-Reality-and-Participatory-Processes-
with visual impairmentsto navigate virtual reality with a haptic andauditory cane to-Design-Interstitial-Healthcare-Places.pdf(AccessedMarch1,2023).
simulator.Proceedingsofthe2018CHIconferenceonhumanfactorsincomputing
systems.AssocComputMachinery.(2018)116:1–14.doi:10.1145/3173574.3173690
JH
69
ea
.
lt
C
h
ar
E
t
n
h
v
e
i
y
ro
J
n
.
R
P
e
a
s
rt
D
ic
e
ip
s.
a
(
to
2
r
0
y
20
d
)
e
1
s
4
ig
(
n
2
,
):9
p
6
r
–
o
1
je
0
c
8
t
.
c
d
l
o
ie
i
n
:
t
1
s
0
,
.1
a
1
n
7
d
7/
h
1
e
9
a
3
l
7
th
58
ca
6
r
7
e
20
u
9
s
4
e
8
r
4
g
6
r
2
oups.
48.MaybergH. MountSinaipartnerswith studioelsewhereto launch Q-lab, an
70.AlizadehsalehiS,HuangJ,HadaviA.Virtualrealityfordesignandconstruction
immersive, interactive research and restorative care environment for deep brain education environment. J Constr Eng Manag. (2019) 2019:1–12. doi: 10.1061/
stimulationpatients.NewYork,NY:MountSinai(2021).Availableat:https://www.
9780784482261.023(AccessedMarch1,2023).
mountsinai.org/about/newsroom/2021/mount-sinai-partners-with-studio-elsewhere-
to-launch-qlab-an-immersive-interactive-research-and-restorative-care-environment- 71. IBM. What is interoperability in healthcare? London: IBM Healthcare
for-deep-brain-stimulation-patients Technology Solutions & Services (2021). Available at:https://www.ibm.com/uk-en/
topics/interoperability-in-healthcare(AccessedMarch1,2023).
49.JohnstonL.Forpeoplewithdementia,virtualrealitycanbelife-changing.London:
WiredUK(2018).Availableat:https://www.wired.co.uk/article/virtual-reality-dementia- 72.FDA.Medicaldeviceinteroperability.SilverSpring,MD:U.S.FoodandDrug
technology Administration (2022). Available at: https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/digital-
health-center-excellence/medical-device-interoperability
50.LauC,QuZ,DraperD,QuanR,BrayteeA,BluffA,etal.Virtualrealityforthe
observationofoncologymodels(VROOM):immersiveanalyticsforoncologypatient 73.NHS.Interoperablemedicinesstandards:Transformingpatientcareandclinical
cohorts.NatSciRep.(2022)12:11337.doi:10.1038/s41598-022-15548-1 services. Leeds: NHS Digital (2022). pp. 1–8. Available at: https://digital.nhs.uk/
services/interoperable-medicines/the-need-for-medicines-interoperability (Accessed
51.PiatkowskiM.Immersivetechnologyforhospitaldesign.Chicago,IL:ASHEHealth
March1,2023).
Facilities (2020). Available at: https://www.hfmmagazine.com/articles/4018-immersive-
technology-for-hospital-design 74. Lehne M, Sass J, Essenwanger A. Why digital medicine depends on
interoperability.NPJDigitMed.(2019)2(79):1–5.doi:10.1038/s41746-019-0158-1
52.QuZ,LayC-W,SimoffS,KennedyP,NguyenQ-V,CatchpooleD.Reviewof
innovative immersive technologies for healthcare applications. Innov Digit Health 75.KPMG.Futureofextendedreality:10predictions,15experts.Sydney:KPMG
DiagnBiomarkers.(2022)2:27–39.doi:10.36401/IDDB-21-04 (2022). p. 1–42. Available at: https://assets.kpmg/content/dam/kpmg/au/pdf/2022/
future-of-XR-white-paper.pdf
53.Herur-RamanA,AlmeidaN,GreenleafW,WilliamsD,KarshenasA,Sherman
J.Next-generationsimulation—integratingextendedrealitytechnologyintomedical 76.HeronL.Thepromiseofimmersivehealthcare:howtheUKcanreapthebenefits
education.FrontVirtualReality.(2021)2:693399.doi:10.3389/frvir.2021.693399 of the latest healthcare innovations that use immersive technology. London: The
InstituteofEngineeringandTechnology(IET)(2020).p.1–24.Availableat:https://
54.KonarskiA,WilliamsM,DaviesR,RoyB.Orthopaedicsurgicaltrainingwith
www.theiet.org/media/9487/the-promise-of-immersive-healthcare.pdf
virtual reality: oySTeR-VR. In: Jung T., Dalton J, editors. XR case studies using
augmented reality and virtual reality technology in business. Springer 77.MoinnereauM-A,deOliveiraA,FalkT.ImmersiveMediaexperience:asurvey
(2021).p.9–16.doi:10.1007/978-3-030-72781-9_2 ofexistingmethodsandtoolsforhumaninfluentialfactorsassessment.JQualUser
Exp.(2022)7(5):1–23.doi:10.1007/s41233-022-00052-1
55.TangY,ChauK,KwokA,ZhuT,MaX.Asystematicreviewofimmersive
technology applications for medical practice and education—trends, application 78. Alonso-Valerdi L-M, Mercado-Garcia V-R. Enrichment of human-computer
areas, recipients, teaching contents, evaluation methods, and performance. J Educ interaction in brain-computer interfaces via virtual environments. J Comput Intell
ResRev.(2021)35:1–23.doi:10.1016/j.edurev.2021.100429 Neurosci.(2017)2017:1–12.doi:10.1155/2017/6076913
56.FreemanD,SlaterM,BebbingtonP,GaretyP,KuipersE,DavidF,etal.Can 79.BeamsR,BrownE,ChengW,JoynerJ,KimA,KontsonK,etal.Evaluation
virtualrealitybeusedtoinvestigatepersecutoryideation?JNervMentDis.(2003) challenges for the application of extended reality devices in medicine. J Digit
191(8):509–14.doi:10.1097/01.nmd.0000082212.83842.fe Imaging.(2022)35(5):1049–418.doi:10.1007/s10278-022-00622-x
57. Fornells-Ambrojo M, Barker C, Swapp D, Slater M, Antley A, Freeman D. 80.BekeleM,ChampionE.Acomparisonofimmersiverealitiesandinteraction
Virtual reality and persecutory delusions: safety and feasibility. J Schizophr Res. methods: cultural learning in virtual heritage. Front Rob AI. (2019) 6:91. doi: 10.
(2008)104:228–36.doi:10.1016/j.schres.2008.05.013 3389/frobt.2019.00091
58.BohilC,AliceaB,BioccaF.Virtualrealityinneuroscienceresearchandtherapy. 81.ObristM,GattiE,MaggioniE,ViC-T,VelascoC.Multisensoryexperiencesin
NatRevNeurosci.(2011)12:752–62.doi:10.1038/nrn3122 HCI.IEEEMultiMedia.(2017)24(2):9–13.doi:10.1109/MMUL.2017.33
59.Pizzoli S,MazzoccoK,TribertiS,Monzani D,Raya M,PravettoniG.User- 82.ObristM,BoyleG,vanBrakelM,DuerinckF(2017).Multisensoryexperiences&
centred virtual reality for promoting relaxation: an innovative approach. Front spaces.ISS‘17:Proceedingsofthe2017ACMinternationalconferenceoninteractive
Psychol.(2019)10:479.doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00479 surfacesandspaces,ACM,p.469–72.doi:10.1145/3132272.3135086
60.PutrinoD,RippJ,HerreraJ,CortesM,KellnerC,RizkD,etal.Multisensory, 83.RakkolainenI,FarooqA,KangasJ,HakulinenJ,RantalaJ,TurunenM,etal.
nature-inspiredrechargeroomsyieldshort-termreductionsinperceivedstressamong Technologies for multimodal interaction in extended reality—a scoping review.
frontlinehealthcareworkers.FrontPsychol.(2020)11:560833.doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2020. JMultimodalTechnolInteract.(2021)5(12):1–34.doi:10.3390/mti5120081
560833
84. Smith J. Immersive virtual environment technology to supplement
61.BestP,MeirelesM,SchroederF,MontgomeryL,MaddockA,DavidsonG,etal. environmental perception, preference and behavior research: a review with
Freelyavailablevirtualrealityexperiencesastoolstosupportmentalhealththerapya applications. Int J Environ Res Public Health. (2015) 12(9):486–505. doi: 10.3390/
systematicscopingreviewandconsensusbasedinterdisciplinaryanalysis.JTechnol ijerph120911486
BehavSci.(2021)7(1):100–14.doi:10.1007/s41347-021-00214-6(AccessedMarch1,
85.SpiegelB.VRx:Howvirtualtherapeuticswillrevolutionizemedicine.NewYork:
2023). BasicBooks(2020).1–247.
62.RichesS,AzevedoL,BirdL,PisaniS,ValmaggiaL.Virtualrealityrelaxationfor 86.KirshD.Doarchitectsanddesignersthinkaboutinteractivitydifferently?ACM
thegeneralpopulation:asystematicreview.SocPsychiatryPsychiatrEpidemiol.(2021) Trans Comput Hum Interact. (2019) 26(2):1–43. doi: 10.1145/3301425 (Accessed
56:1707–27.doi:10.1007/s00127-021-02110-z March1,2023).
63.HedrickA.HowtoplanaXRhealthcarestrategy.In:GreenleafW,RobertsL,FineR, 87. Alavi H, Churchill E, Wiberg M, Lalanne D, Dalsgaard P, Fatah A, et al.
editors.Appliedvirtualrealityinhealthcare:Casestudiesandperspectives.CoolBlueMedia Introduction to human-building interaction (HBI): interfacing HCI with
andInternational VirtualRealityHealthcareAssociation(IVRHA)(2022). p.228–36. architecture and urban design. ACM Trans Comput Hum Interact. (2019) 26
(AccessedMarch1,2023). (2):1–10.doi:10.1145/3309714(AccessedMarch1,2023).
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 20 frontiersin.org
Yang 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
88.AfonsoA,ErginE,SchieckA.Flowingbodies:exploringthemicroandmacro 109.DangA,AroraD,RaneP.Roleofdigitaltherapeutics,andthechangingfuture
scalesofbodilyinteractionswithurbanMediainstallations.Proceedingsofthe2019 ofhealthcare.JFamilyMedPrimCare.(2020)9:2207–13.doi:10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_
on designing interactive systems conference. DIS (2019). p. 1183–93. doi: 10.1145/ 105_20(AccessedMarch1,2023).
3322276.3322378(AccessedMarch1,2023).
110.EhrhartK.Virtualrealityandhealthcaretechnicalconsiderations,limitations
89.PaananenV,MarkkanenP,OppenlaenderJ,LeeL-H,AkmalH,SchieckA,etal. and opportunities. In: Greenleaf W, Roberts L, Fine R, editors. Applied
2VT:Visions,technologies,andvisionsoftechnologiesforunderstandinghumanscale virtual reality in healthcare: Case studies and perspectives. Cool Blue Media
spaces.CHI’21extendedabstracts.NewYork,NY:ACM.(2021).p.1–5.doi:10.1145/ (2022).p.287–91.
3411763.3441315(AccessedMarch1,2023).
111.MorseJ.Digitaltherapeuticsanddecentralizedtrials:amatchmadeinclinical.
90. Kostopoulou E, Schieck A. Chapter 6—designing for hyperlocal: the use of J Appl Clin Trials. (2022) 31(4):12–15. Available at: https://cdn.sanity.io/files/
locative media to augment place narratives. In: Aurigi A, Odendaal N, editors. 0vv8moc6/act/6e40ff81ed1f3f784e5a6a29af746590c921b923.pdf/ACT0422_digital_
Shaping smart for better cities. University College London (2021). p. 87–106. watermark.pdf
doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-818636-7.00016-0(AccessedMarch1,2023).
112.KimM,ChoiH.Digitaltherapeuticsforobesityandeating-relatedproblems.
91.Alexiou A, Butler T,Gramegna I, Dohna F. Futureofhealthcareecosystems. JEndocrinolMetab.(2021)36:220–8.doi:10.3803/EnM.2021.107
London: Arup (2020). pp. 1–58. Available at: https://www.arup.com/perspectives/
113.ChrysikouE,RabnettR,TzirakiC.Perspectivesontherole,andsynergiesof
publications/research/section/future-of-healthcare-ecosystems (Accessed March 1,
architecture, social and built environment in enabling active healthy ageing.
2023). JAgeingRes.(2016)2016:1–8.doi:10.1155/2016/6189349(AccessedMarch1,2023).
92.Deloitte.Healthcareforesight:Identifyingmegatrends.Singapore:DeloitteFuture
HealthCentreofExcellence(2016).p.1–17.Availableat:https://www2.deloitte.com/
Na
1
t
1
io
4
n
.
a
N
l
H
Se
S
r
S
v
.
ice
N
s
H
S
S
co
S
tl
c
a
o
n
tl
d
an
(
d
202
d
1
ig
)
i
.
ta
1
l
–5
tw
6.
in
Av
in
ai
t
l
e
a
r
b
a
l
c
e
tiv
a
e
t:
n
h
a
tt
v
p
i
s
g
:
a
//
t
w
or
w
.
w
E
.
d
cd
in
b
b
b
u
.c
r
a
g
m
h:
.ac
N
.u
H
k
S
/
content/dam/Deloitte/sg/Documents/life-sciences-health-care/sg-lshc-healthcare-foresight- files/2021-08-31_guidance_-_digital_twin_navigator_v02.pdf (Accessed March 1,
megatrends.pdf(AccessedMarch1,2023).
2023).
93. UCL. UCL grand challenges. London: University College London (2020).
115.VoigtI,InojosaH,DillensegerA,HaaseR,AkgunK,ZiemssenT.Digitaltwinsfor
Availableat:https://www.ucl.ac.uk/grand-challenges/(AccessedMarch1,2023). multiplesclerosis.FrontImmunol.(2021)12:669811.doi:10.3389/fimmu.2021.669811
94.BEIS.Policypaper:Thegrandchallenges.London:DepartmentforBusiness,
116.LaubenbacherR,NiarakisA,HelikarT,AnG,ShapiroB,Malik-SheriffR,etal.
Energy&IndustrialStrategy(2021).Availableat:https://www.gov.uk/government/
Buildingdigitaltwinsofthehumanimmunesystem:towardaroadmap.NatDigit
publications/industrial-strategy-the-grand-challenges/industrial-strategy-the-grand- Med.(2022)5:1–5.doi:10.1038/s41746-022-00610-z
challenges(AccessedMarch1,2023).
95.EdkinsA,BarnesY,GraingerA,ChinowskyP.Realestate’s21stcenturygrand 117.KooH.Traininginlungcancersurgerythroughthemetaverse,includingextended
1 ch 0 a (1 ll ) e : n 1– ge 2 s 7 : . t d h o e i: bi 1 g 0. i 2 ss 5 u 2 e 1 s 9/ a e n p d oj p .2 r 0 o 2 je 1 c . t 00 m 1 a 0 n 2 a ( g A em cc e e n ss t e ’s d ro M le a . r J ch En 1 g ,2 P 0 r 2 o 3 je ) c . tOrgan.(2021) r J e E al d it u y c ,i E n va th l e H s e m al a t r h t P op ro e f r . a ( ti 2 n 0 g 21 ro ) o 2 m 02 o 1 f :1 S 8 e – o 3 u 3 l . n d a o ti i o : n 1 a 0 l .3 u 3 n 5 i 2 v / e j r e s e i h ty p. b 2 u 0 n 2 d 1. a 1 n 8 g .3 h 3 ospital,Korea.
118.Solve.Care.Healthcaremetaversesettotakeoffwiththelaunchofthemetaverse
96.DHSC.Healthinfrastructureplan:Anew,strategicapproachtoimprovingour
doctors alliance in South Korea. Seoul: Solve.Care (2021). Available at: https://
hospitals and health infrastructure. London: Department of Health and Social Care
(2019). pp. 1–23. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/health- solve.care/press-release/healthcare-metaverse-set-to-take-off-with-the-launch-of-the-
metaverse-doctors-alliance-in-south-korea/
infrastructure-plan(AccessedMarch1,2023).
119.HawksC,KrasnianskyA.Digitalhealthentersthemetaverse.SanFrancisco,CA:
97.PitmanD,RolfA.Aguidetonetzerocarbonhealthcare.London:ARUP(2020).
pp. 1–24. Available at: https://www.arup.com/perspectives/publications/research/ RockHealth(2022).Availableat:https://rockhealth.com/insights/digital-health-enters-
the-metaverse/
section/net-zero-carbon-healthcare(AccessedMarch1,2023).
98. NHS. The NHS long term plan. London: NHS England (2019). pp. 1–136. (20 1 2 2 2 0 ) .T 6 h (3 o ) m :1 a 6 s 4 o – n 7. J. d M oi: et 1 a 0 v . e 1 r 0 s 1 e 6 , / t j o .g k l e o n hj e . c 2 o 0 n 2 o 2. m 07 ie .0 s, 01 andchronicdiseases.GlobHealthJ.
Availableat:https://www.longtermplan.nhs.uk
121.McWilliamA,ScarfeP.Themetaverseandoncology.JClinOncol.(2022)35
ass
9
e
9
s
.
sm
N
en
H
t
S
—
.
a
T
n
h
n
e
ex
N
1
H
.
S
Lo
lo
n
n
d
g
on
t
:
er
N
m
HS
pla
E
n
n
:
gl
E
a
q
n
u
d
al
(
it
2
y
01
a
9
n
).
d
1
h
–
e
3
a
0
l
.
th
Av
in
ai
e
l
q
a
u
bl
a
e
lit
a
ie
t:
s
h
im
ttp
p
s
a
:
c
//
t (1):12–4.doi:10.1016/j.clon.2022.06.011
www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/ehia-ltp-annex.pdf (Accessed 122.SkalidisI,MullerO,FournierS.Cardioverse:thecardopvascularmedicinein
March1,2023). the era of metaverse. J Trends Cardiovasc Med. (2022) S1050–1738(22):00071–8.
doi:10.1016/j.tcm.2022.05.004(AccessedMarch1,2023).
100.PSC.NHSProperty2021conference.Stockport:PublicSectorConnect(2021).
Availableat:https://www.publicsectorconnect.org/nhsproperty2021/(AccessedMarch 123.ChoiY,LazarA,DemirisG,ThompsonH.Emergingsmarthometechnologies
1,2023). tofacilitateengagingwithaging.JGerontolNurs.(2019)45(12):41–8.doi:10.3928/
00989134-20191105-06(AccessedMarch1,2023).
101. NHSPS. NHS Property disposals: A brief guide. Cheshire: NHS Property
Services (2021). p. 1–10. Available at: https://www.property.nhs.uk/media/3098/ 124.KimJ,SagunaS,AhlundC,MitraK.Augmented reality-assistedhealthcare
nhsps_property-disposals_customer-guide_2021.pdf(AccessedMarch1,2023). system for caregivers in smart regions. The 7th IEEE international smart cities
conference. Manchester: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
102.ChrysikouE,KostopoulouE,SavvopoulouE,SchieckA.Medicalarchitectureon
(2021).doi:10.1109/ISC253183.2021.9562927
the social valorisation of psychiatric patients. Employing transdisciplinary approaches
between architecture, physical and mental wellbeing disciplines. AAE 2017 Conference 125. Ma C, Guerra-Santin O, Mohammadi M. Smart home modification design
proceedings: Architecture connects. Association of Architectural Educators (2017). pp. strategies for ageing in place: a systematic review. J Hous Built Environ. (2021)
33–40. Available at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/316475776_Medical_ 37:625–51.doi:10.1007/s10901-021-09888-z
architecture_on_the_social_valorisation_of_psychiatric_patients_employing_transdiscipli
126. Ticho S. A collaborative vision for the future of immersive healthcare. In:
nary_approaches_between_architecture_physical_and_mental_well-being_disciplines
GreenleafW,RobertsL,FineR,editors.Appliedvirtualrealityinhealthcare:Case
(AccessedMarch1,2023).
studies and perspectives. Cool Blue Media and International Virtual Reality
103.ChrysikouE.Whyweneednewarchitecturalanddesignparadigmstomeetthe HealthcareAssociation(IVRHA)(2022).p.22–6.(AccessedMarch1,2023).
needsofvulnerablepeople.JPalgraveCommunNat.(2018)4(116):1–13.doi:10.1057/
127. Fera B, Korba C, Shukla M. The future of virtual health: executives see
s41599-018-0171-z(AccessedMarch1,2023).
industrywide investments on the horizon. New York, NY: Deloitte Insights (2020).
104.BotosM,McGarrityL,AlukoY,SchurE.Digitaltherapeuticsareredefiningthe pp. 1–22. Available at: https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/health-
digitalhealthmarket.Chicago,IL:Ernst&YoungGlobalLimited(2022).Availableat: care/future-of-virtual-health.html.
https://www.ey.com/en_us/health/digital-therapeutics-are-redefining-digital-health-
128.WilliamsC,RafieiR,HowaldR.Digitalhealthreformulation:Fromhopeto
market(AccessedMarch1,2023). hypetohealth.Lewes:SHLGroup(2020).51–7.Availableat:https://ondrugdelivery.
105.MohanS.Disruptiveinnovationinhealthcare:awickedproblem?Seattle,WA: com/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/108_Jun_2020_SHL.pdf
Milliman (2021). Available at: https://us.milliman.com/en/insight/disruptive-
129. Zimlichman E, Aggarwal R, Bates D. Health care 2030: the coming
innovation-in-healthcare-a-wicked-problem transformation. NEJM Catalyst, Innovations in Care Delivery (2021). p. 1–11.
106.PD.Digitalhealthvs.Digitaltherapeutics.Philadelphia,PA:ParkinsonsDisese.net doi:10.1056/CAT.20.0569(AccessedMarch1,2023).
(2021). Available at: https://parkinsonsdisease.net/clinical/digital-health-versus-digital-
130.LouisR,HutchinsonT,CabritoT.Strategiesforwidescaledeploymentofvirtual
therapeutics(AccessedMarch1,2023).
realityinahospitalsetting.In:GreenleafW,RobertsL,FineR,editors.Appliedvirtual
107.MakinS.Theemergingworldofdigitaltherapeutics:thetreatmentofmany realityinhealthcare:Casestudiesandperspectives.CoolBlueMediaandInternational
physical and mental-health conditions is going digital. Nature. (2019) 573(7775): VirtualRealityHealthcareAssociation(IVRHA)(2022).p.237–44.(AccessedMarch
S106–9.doi:10.1038/d41586-019-02873-1 1,2023).
108.BurroneV,GrahamL,BevanA.Digitaltherapeutics:Pasttrendsandfuture 131.SCH.TheStanfordvirtualheart—revolutionizingeducationoncongenitalheart
prospects. Bethesda, MD: Evidera (2020). Available at: https://www.evidera.com/ defects.Stanford,CA:StanfordChildren’sHealthLucilePackardChildren’sHospital
digital-therapeutics-past-trends-and-future-prospects/#:∼:text=Digital%20therapeutics (2017). Available at: https://www.stanfordchildrens.org/en/innovation/virtual-reality/
%20(DTx)%20are%20a,1%20DTx%20are%20distinct%20from stanford-virtual-heart(AccessedMarch1,2023).
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 21 frontiersin.org
Yang 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1184925
132.JonesK,LoizidesF,EslambolchilarP,JohnsonI,BhatiaS,CrawfordO,etal. London: Policy Exchange. (2021). p.1–14. Available at: https://policyexchange.org.
Reducing anxiety for dental visits. In: Lamas D, Loizides F, Nacke L, Petrie H, uk/wp-content/uploads/Guide-to-the-Finalists-and-Awards.pdf
Winckler M, Zaphiris P, editors. Human-Computer interaction—iNTERACT
2019’.17THIFIPTC13internationalconferencepaphos,Cyprus,September2-6,2019 136. HIMSS. Hospitals of the future: Design in a digital world. Chicago, IL:
proceedings, part IV. Springer (2019). 659–63. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-29390-1 HIMSS.org (2021). Available at: https://www.himss.org/global-conference/session-
hospitals-future-design-digital-world
(AccessedMarch1,2023).
133. Krukar J, Dalton R, Hölscher C. Applying HCI methods and concepts to 137.CharlesA.Integratedcaresystemsexplained:Makingsenseofsystems,places
architecturaldesign(orwhyarchitectscoulduseHCIeveniftheydon’tknowit). and neighbourhoods. London: The King’s Fund (2021). Available at: https://www.
In: Dalton N, Schnädelbach H, Wiberg M, Varoudis T, editors. Architecture and kingsfund.org.uk/publications/integrated-care-systems-explained
interaction: Human computer interaction in space and place. Springer
138. NHS. What are integrated care systems? London: NHS Confederation
(2016).p.17–35.doi:10.1007/978-3-319-30028-3_2(AccessedMarch1,2023).
(2022c).p.1–4.Availableat:https://www.nhsconfed.org/system/files/2022-07/NHS%
134.AitkenM,NassD.Digitalhealthtrends2021:Innovation,evidence,regulation, 20Confederation%20parliamentary%20briefing%20-%20Integrated%20Care%20Systems
andadoption.Durham,NC:IQVIAInstituteforHumanDataScience(2021).1–76. %20%28ICS%29.pdf(AccessedMarch1,2023).
Available at: https://www.iqvia.com/-/media/iqvia/pdfs/institute-reports/digital-
139. Cannon Design. Carlos amato on embracing new patient technology
health-trends-2021/iqvia-institute-digital-health-trends-2021.pdf?_=1659789443388
in healthcare planning and design. Los Angeles, CA: Cannon Design (2020).
(AccessedMarch1,2023).
Available at: https://www.cannondesign.com/news-insights/design/carlos-amato-on-
135.CulleyN,FieldS,AnderssonJ.Hospitalofthefuture:designinadigitalworld. embracing-new-patient-technology-in-healthcare-planning-and-design/ (Accessed
In:EdeR,editors.Wolfsoneconomicsprize2021:Guidetothefinalistsandawards. March1,2023).
FrontiersinMedicalTechnology 22 frontiersin.org