European Research Studies Journal
Volume XXIV, Special Issue 3, 2021
pp. 747-757
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
on the Cross-Border Healthcare
Submitted 18/07/21, 1st revision 12/08/21, 2nd revision 11/09/21, accepted 10/10/21
Katarzyna Byszek1
Abstract:
Purpose: This article presents an overview of cross-border healthcare provided in the Member
States based on Directive 2011/24/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9
March 2011 on applying patients’ rights in cross-border healthcare. Geographical and
cultural proximity is among the most critical drivers for cross-border healthcare in the EU.
Several restrictions, including the freedom of movement, were introduced to prevent the further
spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. These restrictions impacted payer expenditure, healthcare
providers’ income, and patients’ access to healthcare services.
Design/Methodology/Approach: Overall, when comparing data from the full calendar years
2019 and 2020, one may conclude that the expenditure related to patient migration based on
the social security systems was not influenced significantly. However, there is a significant
difference in the cost of the utilization of cross-border healthcare based on patient migration.
Findings: The data on the latter should be interpreted with caution due to the frequent changes
in the regulations regarding prior authorization of healthcare and the freezing of elective care
during the pandemic.
Practical Implications: This paper also provides insights into the ongoing digitalization of
Poland’s healthcare system.
Originality/Value: These efforts in improving interoperability and enabling patient data
exchange can contribute to the further development of cross-border healthcare.
Keywords: Cross-border healthcare, pandemic, patient migration.
JEL Classification: I0, I1.
Research Type: Research article.
1Warsaw School of Economics, kbysze@sgh.waw.pl;
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Cross-Border Healthcare
748
1. Introduction
Solutions for coordinating social security systems and health policy at the European
Union level contributed to the emergence and development of cross-border healthcare.
The historical overview of this type of care, therefore, includes changes that took place
in the above two areas and contributed to the development and subsequent adoption
of Directive 2011/24 / EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of March 9,
2011, on the application of patients' rights in cross-border healthcare.
The Treaty of Rome, which established the European Economic Community,
introduced the free movement of goods, services, capital, and people (workers) on
January 1, 1958. Provisions on the migration of persons were introduced gradually,
starting with Regulation No. 15/1961 / EEC on the gradual withdrawal from
immigration controls and protection of workers already in the territory of another
member of the Community, and then-No. 38/64 / EEC, which strengthened this
protection.
Later regulations were adopted because of a revision of the existing changes in the
social security systems and the situation of the Member States (Regulations No.
1408/71 and 574/72), gradually extending the scope of benefits. The term "social
security" has been repeatedly considered by the European Commission and the courts
to define the range of benefits that would not restrict workers' access to their freedoms
and care, in line with the objectives of the Treaties. Court decisions and conclusions
from intergovernmental arrangements contributed to the adoption of new regulations.
Currently, as of May 1, 2010, three regulations constitute the legal basis for the
functioning of the social security coordination system:
- Regulation (EC) No. 883/2004 of the European Parliament and the Council
on the coordination of social security systems and No. 988/2009 amending
Regulation (EC) No. 883/2004,
- Regulation (EC) No. 987/2009 of the European Parliament and the Council
on implementing Regulation (EC) No. 883/2004.
Under these regulations, persons entitled to receive health services have the right to
healthcare following the legislation of one of the Member States of the European
Union or the European Free Trade Association (EFTA). Depending on the scope of
services and the circumstances of their provision, various documents are required. The
right to benefits necessary to save health or life in a country other than the country
providing insurance is confirmed based on the European Health Insurance Card
(EHIC) or the Certificate temporarily replacing the EHIC. Planned treatment, such as
planned surgery with hospitalization, is available to EU / EFTA patients based on
Form E112 / S2, while benefits for an accident at work or occupational disease are
granted based on Form E123 / DA1.
Katarzyna Byszek
749
These forms are issued by payers-insurers from the Member States and result from the
payer consenting to cover specific medical costs. Patients can benefit from healthcare
services provided in facilities that provide services under the public care system in the
Member State concerned. After meeting all the above conditions, the costs of care are
covered by the state (body) of health insurance, unless the care is provided at
additional cost to the patient, in which case both the insurer and the patient cover the
costs. Payer insurers of individual EU/EFTA countries offer detailed information on
the scope of benefits, and their financing is provided by payer insurers of respective
EU / EFTA countries.
Adopted in 2011 to protect patients' rights in cross-border treatment, the Directive
enabled two parallel systems under which patients can receive treatment outside their
country of nationality in the European Union. The Directive in no way affects the
provisions on the coordination of social benefits. The distinction between these two
legal bases is presented in the table below (Table 1).
Table 1. Distinction between legal bases for cross-border planned and acute health
care
Planned health care Acute health care
Coordination of social Directive 2011/24 of the Coordination of social
security systems, European Parliament and of security systems,
Regulation 1408/71 the Council on the application Regulation 1408/71
(later 883/04) of patients' rights in cross- (later 883/04)
border healthcare
Legal basis art.48 TFEU: free Art.53 TFEU: free movement art.48 TFEU: free
movement of workers of services movement of workers
Prior Obligatory May be required by Member Not obligatory
authorization States (MS)
for hospital
treatment
Prior Obligatory May be required by MS for Not obligatory
authorization highly specialized and cost-
for intensive treatments
outpatient
treatment
Conditions of The benefits are Out-of-pocket payments and Benefits are provided
payment provided on the basis of subsequent reimbursement in in accordance with the
the regulations of the the state of affiliation as regulations binding in
MS, making it possible required by that state the state where
to pay in some treatment is provided.
countries. The costs of treatment
The costs of treatment are covered by the
are covered by state state of insurance (the
insurance (the flow of flow of funds between
funds between health the health insurance
insurance institutions of institutions of both
both countries) countries).
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Cross-Border Healthcare
750
Level of It depends on the MS It depends on the state of It depends on the
reimburseme where treatment takes insurance. Only actual member state where
nt place. If the cost of treatment costs are the treatment takes
treatment is higher in reimbursed. place
the state of treatment
than in the state of
affiliation, consent is
required for the state of
affiliation to cover the
difference.
Source: Own creation.
2. Literature Review
On 19 January 2011, the European Parliament and on 28 February 2011, the Council
of the European Union adopted the final text of the Directive on applying patients'
rights in cross-border healthcare. The EU legislator introduced a definition of cross-
border healthcare, i.e., care provided or prescribed in a Member State other than the
Member State of affiliation, and adopted the general rule that a patient covered by the
health insurance system of one of the EU countries would be able to receive
reimbursement of healthcare services received in another EU country at the rates
applied by the home insurance institution, without the need to apply to that institution
for authorization to receive treatment abroad, provided that the benefit in question is
a benefit guaranteed in the state providing the health insurance (Article 7 of the
Directive). The patient - a beneficiary with health insurance in a country of the EU -
is entitled to reimbursement of the costs of guaranteed services provided in another
EU country, except for preventive vaccinations, long-term care, and transplantation of
cells, tissues, and organs.
If a patient has received cross-border healthcare and further medical observation is
necessary, the Directive ensures that the same medical comment is available as would
be provided if healthcare were received on its territory. In addition, it is the
responsibility of the Member State to ensure that patients who will receive or benefit
from cross-border care have at least one copy of their medical records or have remote
access to them (Article 5 of the Directive). At the same time, the Directive allows the
Member State to introduce mechanisms and measures to protect the efficiency of the
health system (cost control and protection of financial, technical, and human
resources) to ensure permanent access to high-quality treatment.
However, such mechanisms and measures should only be used as necessary and
following the principle of proportionality (Article 4 of the Directive). For this purpose,
among the premises for the possibility of introducing a system of prior authorization
to use cross-border healthcare services, Art. 8 addresses:
- the need to plan services and ensure constant access to them and
hospitalization for at least one night or the use of highly specialized and
expensive medical infrastructure or equipment;
Katarzyna Byszek
751
- treatment that imposes particular risks for the patient or society;
- the healthcare provider raises reasonable doubts about the quality and safety
of care.
The national contact points established in the directive exchange information between
the Member States and patients, including formal requirements. They also consult
patients' organizations, healthcare providers, and insurers (companies and institutions
offering health insurance in a given EU country).
Under Art. 42c of the Act on Healthcare Services Covered by the public funding, the
National Health Fund reimburses the costs of cross-border healthcare in the amount
corresponding to the cost of healthcare services guaranteed in Poland, with four
grounds for determining the number of payments. The first one results from the
amount used in settlements between the National Health Fund and service providers
under the contract for the provision of healthcare services. In the case of highly
specialized services, medical rescue operations performed by emergency medical
teams, and services provided under health programs financed from the state budget, it
is assumed that the amount of the reimbursement corresponds to the amount of
financing for a given service.
In the third case, i.e., the refund of the costs of drugs, foodstuffs for nutritional uses
or medical devices, for which a reimbursement decision has been issued, and
consequently included in the list of reimbursed products in specific indications
(Article 37 (1) of the Act on the amount of the funding limit for a particular product).
In the case of medical devices that constitute services guaranteed under Art. 38 (4) of
the Reimbursement Act, i.e., issued on request, the amount of the refund corresponds
to the value of the medical device but is not higher than the limit of public funding for
a given device.
Healthcare baskets (or catalogs) of guaranteed benefits vary from country to country.
The same applies to the names of services and the scope of medical procedures
included in them. Therefore, if a medical process conducted based on the cross-border
Directive in another EU country does not have an exact equivalent in Poland, then the
basis for the reimbursement is the amount of financing for the medical procedure
falling within the scope of the guaranteed service that is most medically similar to the
one being provided. Differences in the baskets of benefits may also mean that some
medical procedures constitute two separate benefits in another EU country, and in
Poland constitute one guaranteed health service. Therefore, their implementation will
result in two applications for reimbursement.
Consequently, they will be treated by the National Health Fund as the basis for the
refund of the amount equal to the financing of this guaranteed service. The total
amount of reimbursement based on these requests, following Art. 42 c of paragraph
1. 4 of the Act on benefits cannot exceed the amount of financing for this benefit.
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Cross-Border Healthcare
752
3. Discussion
The pandemic caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus forced many changes to protect lives.
A key consequence was the “freezing” of healthcare: due to the recommendations of
the National Health Fund (NFZ), in March, facilities began to suspend planned health
services, including surgical procedures. Consultations in primary care (POZ) and
outpatient specialist care (AOS) began to be performed remotely, mainly by phone.
As part of the reorganization of the system for managing the epidemic situation, the
Ministry of Health decided in mid-March 2020 to transform 19 facilities into
infectious hospitals, intended to treat only patients with suspected and confirmed
SARS-CoV-2 infection. In the weeks that followed, the number of such hospitals
increased to 21. The transformed institutions, often among the largest in their
respective regions, were assigned a different legal status. The move had an overall
negative impact on access to healthcare.
Along with the sanitary regime, the Member States temporarily restricted the free
movement of people. In 2019, Poland spent approximately 423 million PLN on cross-
border healthcare based on the regulations on coordination of social security systems.
This breaks down to the app. 268,3 million PLN for treatment delivered in Germany,
app. 7,5 million PLN in the Netherlands, approximately 31 million PLN in France,
app. 15,8 million PLN in Austria, app. 15,3 million PLN in Italy; app. 7,8 million PLN
in Spain; app. 8,9 million PLN in Belgium; app. 17,1 million PLN in Sweden; app.
20,6 million PLN in the United Kingdom; app. 6,3 million PLN in Ireland; app. 1,8
million PLN in Norway; app. 3,4 million PLN in the Czech Republic; app. 3,3 million
PLN in Slovakia; app. 6,7 million PLN in Switzerland; app. 1,8 million PLN in
Denmark; app. 1,4 million PLN in Luxembourg; app. 1,3 million PLN in Greece and
Finland; with the remainder spent in 13 other countries respectively. Data on the value
of healthcare services reimbursed by the National Health Fund in 2019 are depicted
in Figure 1 for values over 1 million PLN.
In 2020, Poland spent approximately 498 million PLN on cross-border healthcare
based on the regulations on coordination of social security systems. This breaks down
to the app. Three hundred sixty-seven million PLN for treatment delivered in
Germany, app. 18,6 million PLN in the Netherlands, app. 17,7 million PLN in France,
app. 12,4 million PLN in Austria, app. 12,1 million PLN in Italy; app. 11,9 million
PLN in Spain; app. 21,6 million PLN in Belgium; app. 8,7 million PLN in Sweden;
app. 8,7 million PLN in the United Kingdom; app. 4 million PLN in Ireland; app. 3,8
million PLN in Norway; app. 3,7 million PLN in the Czech Republic; app. Three
million PLN in Switzerland; app. 1,4 million PLN in Denmark; app. 1,1 million PLN
in Portugal, with the remainder spent in 15 other countries. Figure 2 presents data on
the value of over 1 million PLN of healthcare services reimbursed by the National
Health Fund in 2020.
Katarzyna Byszek
753
Figure 1. Coordination of social security systems – Utilisation values 2019
Source: Own creation.
Figure 2. Coordination of social security systems - Utilisation values 2020
Source: Own creation.
In 2019, Poland spent approximately 32 million PLN on cross-border healthcare based
on the patients’ directive. This breaks down to app. 29,5 million PLN for treatment
delivered in the Czech Republic, app. 1,5 million PLN in Lithuania, app. 0,7 million
PLN in Germany, app. 0,1 million PLN in Slovakia with the remainder spent in Spain,
Italy, Austria, and France, respectively.
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Cross-Border Healthcare
754
Figure 3. Patient's directive - Utilisation values 2019
Source: Own creation.
Figure 3 presented data with the flows giving the value of healthcare services
reimbursed by the National Health Fund in 2019.
In 2020, Poland spent approximately 20,3 million PLN on cross-border healthcare
based on the patients’ directive. This breaks down to the app. 17.4 million PLN for
treatment delivered in the Czech Republic, app. 0,9 million PLN in Lithuania, appr.1,8
million PLN in Germany, and the remainder spent in the United Kingdom, Slovakia,
Spain, Italy, Austria, and France. Figure 4 presents data with the flows of healthcare
services reimbursed by the National Health Fund in 2020.
Figure 4. Patient’s directive - Utilisation values 2020
Source: Own creation.
Katarzyna Byszek
755
4. Conclusions
Poland has benefited from worker migration since it joined the EU and labor markets
opened up to the Polish workforce. Overall, when comparing data from the full
calendar years 2019 and 2020, one may conclude that expenditure related to patient
migration based on social security systems was not influenced significantly. This is
perhaps because Polish residents maintain continuous employment in the other EU
Member States, so the system does not recognize them as migrant workers. Another
reason could be that patients in Poland cannot access specific medical procedures in
Poland. These two factors can, in parallel, impact the cost of expenditure and the
volume of Utilisation of cross-border services based on the regulation of social
security systems in the EU.
Interpreting the data about expenditures on cross-border healthcare based on the
patients' directive is far more complex. One reason is that the order is a relatively new
regulation (transposed into the Polish legal system in 2014). The Polish authorities
were reluctant to support the EU level in fear of unpredictable demand for cross-
border services and healthcare spending constraints. The need to control the budget
and non-authorized spending has resulted in a shifting approach to the regulation each
year based on the utilization data and the attendant expenses. Undoubtedly,
restrictions on the free movement of people and accelerated introduction and freeze in
elective care impacted patient volumes in cross-border healthcare and resulted in
refraining from its use unless it was necessary to protect patients' lives.
Patient mobility has received a great deal of political attention in the EU. It is also a
subject of regulation because each member state can assess its financial impact and
regulate access to cross-border healthcare to limit Utilisation and ensure that the
funding goes to the national health providers. However, the scale and nature are
increasingly contested as it is recognized
that different actors have divergent interests. Geographical and cultural proximity is
among the most critical drivers for cross-border healthcare in the EU (Glinos et al.,
2010). This is also reflected in the data for patient migration in 2019 and 2020.
Regardless of external conditions such as the pandemic, the most robust flows of
migration are visible between regions with geographic and cultural ties (Poland-
Germany for coordination of social security systems, and Poland - the Czech Republic
for the patients' directive).
Regionally driven collaboration across countries is particularly important and may
require less political commitment. Relative geographical isolation or medical deserts
(i.e., rural areas with provider shortages) may also drive cross-border healthcare.
Additionally, regions with a higher degree of innovative capacity might compensate
for geographical disadvantages by showing a higher commitment to digital
technologies (eHealth) in healthcare through investments in necessary infrastructure
and reimbursement models.
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Cross-Border Healthcare
756
In recent years, the digitalization of health services in the EU has increased, with the
adoption of an eHealth agenda across the EU, impacting patient migration. Before the
pandemic, there were few arguments used to rationalize digitalizing healthcare. On
use, while processing legal initiatives was to ensure the safety and quality of
healthcare services. Another was that digitalization and subsequent exchange of
patient data could save time and reduce workloads and associated costs for health
providers in the longer term.
Alongside the promising benefits of eHealth come concerns over the legislative,
governance, technological issues. These have been recognized at the regional,
national, and EU levels. Various digital solutions can be used in eHealth, including
telehealth, electronic health records (EHR), online prescription, and health
information systems. However, these solutions require the user's acceptance and
training for widespread adoption and ensure adequate infrastructures so that the
quality of services can be maintained and used throughout the health services. Further
challenges include:
• Interoperability of health information systems.
• We update the administrative and organizational structures of existing health
institutions and the legal and financial aspects of implementing and running
eHealth services.
• We are ensuring secure data exchange.
With the proper infrastructure, transparent legal framework, appropriate funding, and
government support, eHealth can facilitate cross-border healthcare and ensure that EU
resident's healthcare needs are met.
Developments in eHealth will require a more consistent and comprehensive policy
and regulatory framework to facilitate data exchange among healthcare providers at
the national level and across the EU. The pandemic has shown that there is no long-
term vision for telemedicine, its use, or reimbursement in some countries, including
Poland. This means the solutions in place and their impact on cross-border healthcare
are temporary and difficult to assess. The lack of evidence-based decisions in
healthcare can negatively influence access to overall healthcare and patient safety.
References:
European Parliament. 2004. Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council (EC)
No. 883/2004 of 29 April 2004 on the coordination of social security systems, OJ
UE L 166/1
European Parliament. 2006. Regulation (EC) No 1082/2006 of the European Parliament and
of the Council of 5 July 2006 on a European grouping of territorial cooperation
(EGTC).
European Parliament. 2007. Regulation (EC) No 864/2007 of the European Parliament and
of the Council of 11 July 2007 on the law applicable to non-contractual
Katarzyna Byszek
757
obligations (Rome II) and other EU rules on private international law, in
particular rules on jurisdiction and applicable law, OJ UE L 199.
European Parliament. 2008. Regulation (EC) No 593/2008 of the European Parliament and
of the Council of 17 June 2008 on the law applicable to contractual obligations,
OJ UE L 177.
European Parliament. 2009. Regulation (EC) No 987/2009 of the European Parliament and
of the Council of 16 September 2009 laying down the procedure for
implementing Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 on the coordination of social
security systems, OJ UE L 284/1.
European Parliament. 2011. Directive 2011/24/EU of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 9 March 2011 on the application of patients' rights in cross-border
healthcare; OJ UE L 88.
Glinos, et al. 2010. A Typology of Cross-border Patient Mobility. Health & Place, 16(6),
1145-55. DOI: 10.1016/j.healthplace.2010.08.001. The National Health Fund.
2019. Report of 2019.
Health Fund. 2020. Report of 2020.
The Act on Healthcare Services Covered by the public funding. Dz. U. 2004 Nr 210 poz.
2135 with amendments.