King’s Research Portal
DOI:
10.12968/bjcn.2022.27.2.69
Docume nt Version
Peer rev iewed version
Link to publication record in King's Research Portal
Citation for published version (APA):
Baker, E. (2022). Improving sepsis recognition through use of the Sepsis Trust’s community screening tool.
British J ournal of Community Nursing, 27(2), 69-75. https://doi.org/10.12968/bjcn.2022.27.2.69
Citing this paper
Please note that where the full-text provided on King's Research Portal is the Author Accepted Manuscript or Post-Print version this may
differ from the final Published version. If citing, it is advised that you check and use the publisher's definitive version for pagination,
volume/issue, and date of publication details. And where the final published version is provided on the Research Portal, if citing you are
again advised to check the publisher's website for any subsequent corrections.
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the Research Portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright
owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognize and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
•Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the Research Portal for the purpose of private study or research.
•You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
•You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the Research Portal
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact librarypure@kcl.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
Download date: 17. Mar. 2026
British Journal of Community Nursing
Improving sepsis recognition using the Sepsis Trusts’ community screening tool
--Manuscript Draft--
Manuscript Number: bjcn.2021.0087R1
Full Title: Improving sepsis recognition using the Sepsis Trusts’ community screening tool
Article Type: Clinical review
Corresponding Author: Edward James Baker, PhD
King's College London
London, UNITED KINGDOM
Corresponding Author Secondary
Information:
Corresponding Author's Institution: King's College London
Corresponding Author's Secondary
Institution:
First Author: Edward James Baker, PhD
First Author Secondary Information:
Order of Authors: Edward James Baker, PhD
Order of Authors Secondary Information:
Abstract: Sepsis is associated with high levels of morbidity and mortality. All healthcare
professionals have a responsibility to ensure they have sufficient knowledge to
effectively screen patients for signs and symptoms of sepsis. In the community setting,
screening for sepsis can be challenging due to the complexity within the patient
population and difficulties associated with observation for changes in the patient’s
condition. The Sepsis Trust community nursing sepsis screening tool provides decision
making support to community healthcare professionals enabling them to make a rapid
assessment for risk factors for sepsis, ensuring a proportionate, consistent, and
appropriate response. Through implementation of a decision support tool within the
clinical setting it is likely that patients at risk of sepsis will be identified earlier, and
patients will be escalated in a more consistent manner. This process of improving
consistency in practice can improve patient outcomes, including mortality, morbidity,
and overall patient experience.
Powered by Editorial Manager® and ProduXion Manager® from Aries Systems Corporation
Title page
Improving sepsis recognition using the Sepsis Trusts’ community
screening tool
Dr Edward Baker PhD, RN (Corresponding Author)
Lecturer in Applied Technology for Clinical Care
King’s College London
King’s College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust
edward.e.baker@kcl.ac.uk
Conflict of Interest: Nil to declare
Ethical Statement: Not applicable
Funding Source: No funding to declare
Abstract:
Sepsis is associated with high levels of morbidity and mortality. All healthcare professionals have a
responsibility to ensure they have sufficient knowledge to effectively screen patients for signs and
symptoms of sepsis. In the community setting, screening for sepsis can be challenging due to the
complexity within the patient population and difficulties associated with observation for changes in
the patient’s condition. The Sepsis Trust community nursing sepsis screening tool provides decision
making support to community healthcare professionals enabling them to make a rapid assessment
for risk factors for sepsis, ensuring a proportionate, consistent, and appropriate response. Through
implementation of a decision support tool within the clinical setting it is likely that patients at risk of
sepsis will be identified earlier, and patients will be escalated in a more consistent manner. This
process of improving consistency in practice can improve patient outcomes, including mortality,
morbidity, and overall patient experience.
Anonymous manuscript Click here to view linked References
Keywords:
Sepsis; Nursing; Risk Assessment; Infections; Community Nursing; Decision Making.
Key Points:
 Sepsis is associated with high levels of mortality and morbidity globally.
 Early recognition of sepsis is key to treatment and is associated with improved clinical
outcomes.
 Identification of sepsis in the community setting can be challenging due to complexities in
the patient population.
 Healthcare professionals in the community setting need to have a foundation knowledge of
the red and amber flags for sepsis to facilitate identification.
 The Sepsis Trust recommends that healthcare professionals in the community setting use a
sepsis screening tool to aid decision making around sepsis identification and management.
 Embedding a sepsis screening tool into daily practice can improve the consistency in the
sepsis identification process which may be associated with improved patient outcomes.
Reflective Activities:
 Initially, consider what specific learning needs you might have in relation to understanding
the pathway of developing sepsis and septic shock.
 From your experience, what factors increase the patient’s risk of developing sepsis in the
community setting?
 Consider whether there have been unwell patients in your own practice who may have had
sepsis, what signs and symptoms did these patients have?
 How would using a sepsis screening tool change the way you might manage a patient with
signs and symptoms of sepsis?
 Think about using the Sepsis Trust screening tool, what are some of the challenges to
implementing this and embedding it in your daily clinical practice?
Improving sepsis recognition using the Sepsis Trusts’ community
screening tool
Introduction:
Sepsis remains a significant cause of morbidity and mortality across all high-, middle- and low-
income countries despite increasing education for healthcare professionals and growing awareness
from the public (Dondorp et al., 2019, Hantrakun et al., 2018, Jabaley et al., 2018, Rudd et al., 2020).
Sepsis is currently defined as a dysregulated host response to an infection which is mediated by the
immune system causing in a physiological cascade resulting in organ dysfunction, multi-organ failure
and potential death (Feist, 2019, Kim and Park, 2019, Singer et al., 2016). Septic shock is a term
which describes a later stage in this physiological cascade whereby there is profound circulatory,
cellular, and metabolic abnormality which is associated with increased subsequent mortality rates.
Patients with sepsis often have acute and critical care needs and therefore require definite
treatment and monitoring within the acute secondary care setting (Hunt, 2019, Lin, 2021, Singer et
al., 2016).
In the UK, c. 250,000 people are diagnosed with sepsis yearly, resulting in around 52,000 deaths
which are directly attributed to sepsis as a cause of death (Rudd et al., 2020). Of those who survive,
it is estimated that c. 60,000 people have residual and often permanent sequela after discharge from
acute care (Iwashyna et al., 2012, Iwashyna et al., 2010). It is estimated that c. £15.6 billion is spent
on the diagnosis and treatment of this illness (Prescott and Angus, 2018).
In 2015, the National Confidential Enquiry into Patient Outcome and Deaths (NCEPOD) highlighted
the need for earlier detection of signs of sepsis across the healthcare system as the single most
effective way of improving patient outcomes and potentially avoidable sepsis related deaths in the
UK (NCEPOD, 2015). Furthermore, there is a growing body of evidence stressing the association
between early identification of sepsis in patients with an infective source in the acute setting and
improvements in outcomes including mortality, intensive care requirement and hospital length of
stay (Burdick et al., 2020, Husabø et al., 2021, Kim and Park, 2019, Torsvik et al., 2016). The NCEPOD
report also identified that around 70% of sepsis cases originated in the community setting. In a
healthcare model whereby increasing numbers of acutely unwell patients are manged within the
community setting, there is a need for specific early detection skills amongst healthcare
professionals working (NCEPOD, 2015). Despite this, there is a paucity of evidence surrounding
current community nursing practices around the identification of sepsis. The Sepsis Trust’s
community nursing sepsis screening tool provides one method of identifying patients at risk of
developing sepsis (Nutbeam and Daniels, 2020). This article aims to demonstrate how the
community nursing sepsis screening tool can be used by healthcare professionals to improve
identification of signs and symptoms of sepsis and facilitate consistent decision-making processes
around escalation of care needs.
The Sepsis Trust:
The Sepsis Trust is a UK based charity, created in 2012 in an effort to raise awareness of sepsis and
the high levels of mortality associated with sepsis. The charity has an overriding long-term aim of
stopping preventable deaths from sepsis and providing support to all affected by this disease. The
organisation works to raise awareness of sepsis among members of the public and healthcare
professionals by providing education, research, and support to support early diagnosis. The Trust
also lobbies politicians to raise awareness and improve standards of care whist providing greater
support for sepsis survivors. Since the Sepsis Trust’s inception there has been a steady increase in
sepsis awareness at both national and international levels highlighting the substantial work which
needs to be done to improve the immediate survival and long-term outcomes of patients with
sepsis. The Sepsis Trust plays an important role in sepsis education for both patients and clinicians
alike and has a wide range of resources which would be useful for both patients and healthcare
professionals. The trust website can be accessed at: https://sepsistrust.org/
Recognising sepsis in the community setting:
It is essential for all healthcare professionals to have an underpinning baseline knowledge of sepsis
as this knowledge equips a clinician with the tools to recognise the signs of sepsis, which can at
times be vague and non-specific. Unrecognised sepsis in the community is associated with high
levels of mortality and morbidity and delayed identification of sepsis has been demonstrated to
increase the acute and critical care needs of patients (Scott et al., 2018). The Sepsis Trust has
published a community nursing sepsis recognition tool to aid healthcare professionals in the
community in identifying potential sepsis and providing a pathway to escalating increasing care
needs to ensure timely transfer of patients to hospital. Figure 1 presents the Sepsis Trust Community
nursing sepsis screening tool which can be used on any patient over 12 years old.
-Insert Fig. 1 here-
Figure 1: Sepsis Screening Tool Community Nursing (Nutbeam and Daniels, 2020) (Reproduced with
prior permission from the Sepsis Trust)
To effectively identify sepsis, healthcare professionals should have assessment skills which enable
them to take an accurate and focused patient history and physical assessment. Community clinicians
are unable to easily access investigations and so need to rely on clinical judgement to elicit clinical
signs which may help in the identification of the symptoms of sepsis (Olander et al., 2021). All
patients should have a full set of vital signs completed and documented as part of the assessment
process and a NEWS2 score should be calculated and documented for all vital signs recorded (Baker
et al., 2021, Inada-Kim et al., 2020). The NEWS2 score is a simple risk stratification score which
measures the potential for deterioration and critical illness and is calculated from the culmination of
scores associated with each vital sign (Respiratory Rate, Oxygen Saturations, Pulse, Blood Pressure,
Temperature and Level of Consciousness). The NEWS2 score itself is strongly associated with in-
hospital mortality and there is growing evidence to support the use of NEWS2 in the community
setting (Brangan et al., 2018, Pullyblank et al., 2020). It is important for clinicians to recognise that
the use of NEWS2 in isolation is not sufficient for the identification of patients with sepsis and where
possible this risk stratification score should be used alongside a sepsis screening tool in the clinical
setting.
It is recommended that all clinical areas employ a sepsis screening tool to facilitate earlier
identification of sepsis risk (Mulders et al., 2021). The tool is simple to follow and encourages the
clinician to ask four questions to help elicit pertinent information from a patient history and physical
assessment. The specific questions are as follows:
1. Does the patient look unwell, or do they have abnormal physiological signs?
2. Could this be due to an infection?
3. Are any Sepsis Red Flags present in this patient?
4. Are any Sepsis Amber flags present in this patient?
(Nutbeam and Daniels, 2020)
For patients who appear to be unwell or have abnormal physiological signs on examination, it is vital
that clinicians are aware of factors which are recognised to increase the patient’s risk of developing
sepsis in the presence of an underlying infection. The patients at greatest risk of developing sepsis
are as follows (Hunt, 2019):
 Older adults aged over 75 years
 Infants and young children
 People with learning disabilities
 Recent trauma, surgery, pregnancy, childbirth, or miscarriage
 Patients with an acute or chronic wound or skin breach
 Patients with an indwelling line or catheter
 Illicit intravenous drug use
 Patients with compromised immunity (post splenectomy, diabetes, long-term steroid or
immunotherapy medications, or cancer and cancer treatment)
But what does sepsis look like?
Sepsis can present in many different ways, and the presentation of sepsis depends on specific
characteristics of the patient including their co-morbidities and effects of the medications they are
taking (Vincent, 2016). Patients who present with sepsis may have one or more of the following
clinical signs or symptoms (Hunt, 2019):
 Pyrexia
 Rigors
 Hypothermia
 Decreased urine outcome
 Sustained tachycardia (heart rate >90 per minute)
 Nausea and/or vomiting
 Diarrhoea
 Fatigue/Lethargy/weakness
 Abnormal skin discolouration
 Sweating and/or clammy
 Severe pain
Clinicians should be aware that some indicators of infection like the presence of a pyrexia is not a
good indicator of infection or sepsis in isolation, particularly in patients who are
immunocompromised (Hunt, 2019). A proportion of patients with sepsis will present with
hypothermia rather than a pyrexia, and there is evidence to show that outcomes for patient with
sepsis presenting with a low temperature have worse outcomes, particularly in relation to mortality
(Rumbus et al., 2017, Wiewel et al., 2016). For this reason, any patient who is presenting with a new
onset undifferentiated illness or has vital signs which are abnormally deviated from baseline, an
assessment for sepsis is required. It is also important for any healthcare professional to carefully
consider whether the patient meets one of the high-risk criteria and critically ask themselves
whether there is a potential source of infection, and this remains a crucial step in the recognition
process for sepsis (Kabi et al., 2020).
If after taking a comprehensive history and completing a full physical examination of the patient,
sepsis is unlikely and a source for infection is not identified, it is essential for the clinician to consider
an alternative diagnosis. This is likely to involve further examination and history taking and if a cause
is not identified this should be escalated to a decision-making clinician who might be a General
Practitioner, Advanced Clinical Practitioner or Team leader. Where an infective source is likely, the
next stage of the sepsis assessment is to consider whether the patient has any Red or Amber Flag
signs.
-Insert Table 1 here-
Management of a ‘Red Flag’ sepsis:
Red Flags in healthcare are potentially alarming warning symptoms, signs and near patient
diagnostic tests which highlight possibly serious underlying disease processes to healthcare
professionals (Schroeder et al., 2011). Table 1 presents key ‘Red Flags’ for sepsis in adults. To assess
for the presence of Red Flags a face-to-face physical assessment is required including a full set of
patient vital signs. The presence of one or more sepsis red flags indicates a time critical medical
emergency and healthcare professionals in the community setting should implement the community
nursing red flag care bundle without delay as the patient is likely to have sepsis or septic shock
(Kopczynska et al., 2018). The primary action within this care bundle is to activate a response from
the local emergency ambulance service (i.e., by calling 999 in the UK) (Nutbeam and Daniels, 2020).
Within this process, the importance of effective communication and information transfer between
healthcare professionals to key to preventing delays and enabling optimised treatment outcomes for
the patient. Healthcare professionals should make sure that the correct terminology is used when
communicating with both control room call handers and clinicians from the emergency services. It is
important that community nurses state, where appropriate, that it is ‘a red flag sepsis’ to ensure
that the emergency call is categorised correctly to get the most appropriate response time (Floer et
al., 2021).
-Insert Table 2 here-
The overall aim of the community nursing red flag care bundle is to enable a rapid patient transfer to
the acute secondary care setting. Management of sepsis in the acute secondary care setting follows
an evidence-based approach using the ‘Sepsis Six’ care bundle approach to patient management
(Lin, 2021). Table 2 presents any overview of the sepsis six components. Early treatment following
this protocol has been shown to reduce levels of mortality, critical care requirement and length of
stay and improve long term determinants of health-related quality of life (Nutbeam and Daniels,
2020).
It is commonly acknowledged that healthcare professionals in the community are unlikely to be able
to complete all (or sometimes any) of the sepsis six care bundle which is why the priority in the
community is to call for emergency help to facilitate treatment and transfer to secondary care (Lin,
2021). Despite this, it is recognised that in many areas of the UK, where the emergency ambulance
trusts are under increasing pressure, there are increasing response times. In this situation, after the
emergency call has been made, there may be opportunities for practitioners with extended skills,
carrying appropriate equipment, who have an extended scope of practice to commence treatment
(Bain and Moggach, 2019, Raleigh and Allan, 2017). This is likely to be limited to oxygen therapy,
intravenous fluid therapy and intravenous antibiotic therapies but it is important to recognise that
the commencement of any treatment is secondary to calling for support from the emergency
services.
Assessing for Amber Flags for Sepsis:
Where a patient has a clear infective source but does not have any sepsis Red Flags, the clinician is
required to move onto stage 4 of the community nursing sepsis screening tool which focuses on the
identification of the Amber Flags for sepsis (Nutbeam and Daniels, 2020). Amber Flags in sepsis are
less specific and indicate potentially sub-acute than the red flag signs but highlight that a patient
could deteriorate and develop red flag signs if urgent care and treatment is not provided (Allen,
2018). If you are assessing for amber flags in a patient between 12-17 years old and the patient is
immunocompromised then they should be treated immediately as a Red Flag sepsis and the
community red flag sepsis care bundle should be commenced immediately (Nutbeam and Daniels,
2020). The amber flag signs are presented in Table 1 and if one or more sign is present during
assessment then a pre-defined escalation plan is included with the Community nursing sepsis
screening tool. The healthcare professional must select the most appropriate escalation option
based on the findings of the physical assessment process and in agreement with the patient or their
primary carer. Escalation will follow one of the following processes:
 Is the patient well enough to have a same day review by a decision-making clinician (e.g.,
GP)?
 Is an urgent referral for review by the acute secondary care team required? (e.g., transfer to
the emergency department for the acute medical team to review the patients care needs)
 Does the patient meet the essential criteria for review by the Hospital in the Home team?
If there is any doubt as to whether the patient can wait for assessment and treatment, then call the
emergency services as they will provide a decision-making clinician who is trained to decide whether
the patient requires immediate transfer to acute secondary care. Where possible, it is important to
integrate the patient and/or primary carer in the process of making decisions relating to treatment
including transfer to hospital (Abrashkin et al., 2019). If a patient is refusing transfer to hospital, it is
essential for the healthcare professional to make a formal assessment of mental capacity of the
patient recognising that sepsis could potentially impact on a patient’s capacity and ability to make
decisions whilst potentially critically unwell (Marshall and Sprung, 2016).
Where no amber flags are identified the assessing clinician can be confident that there are no
current signs of sepsis even when an underpinning source of infection has been identified. In this
instance, it is important that the clinician can undertake further investigation through physical
assessment with history taking and potentially the use of secondary data (i.e., blood tests) to identify
a diagnosis for the patient. In the presence of an infection, this is likely to result in commencing
antibiotic treatment (if not already started). Where commencing treatment is not within the scope
of practice of a community healthcare professional, then timely escalation to a decision-making
clinician is required at this point. It is important for any community healthcare professional using the
sepsis screening tool to recognise that assessment for signs of sepsis needs to occur longitudinally at
different time points because although the patient does not have any red flag signs during the initial
assessment, it does not mean that they will not deteriorate and develop red flag signs in the future.
As there are likely to be extended periods of time when patients are not under observation for
deterioration (i.e., in between visits from a healthcare professional) effective safety netting and
patient education is key to protecting both patients and clinicians alike (Massey et al., 2017, Tucker
and Lusher, 2018).
Safety Netting advice in those at risk of developing sepsis:
The sepsis screening tool enables community healthcare professionals with a method of supporting
the decision-making process in identifying sepsis and those patients who are likely to require
escalation and urgent treatment in both primary and secondary care setting (Edwards et al., 2019).
For any patient who is not transferred to a definitive care setting at the time of initial screening, it is
important to consider what education and support these patients require at home. At a minimum,
each patient will require both written and verbal safety netting (Edwards et al., 2021). The Sepsis
Trust have produced several patient resources which can be useful to ensuring patients and carers
have sufficient information to identify potential signs of deterioration. These resources can be
accessed on the sepsis trust website: https://sepsistrust.org/get-support/support/resources/. In
relation to effective case management, all safety netting advice should be documented within the
patient’s case notes, alongside any treatment which has been offered or commenced at the time
assessment. It is important to patients that they understand when they will next be reviewed by a
healthcare professional and advise on how to contact the emergency service if the patient or carer is
concerned about deterioration (Edwards et al., 2021).
Conclusion:
As there is evidence showing that a substantial proportion of patients develop sepsis within the
community setting there is a clear need for clinicians to have support in the decision-making process
around sepsis identification. There is a continuing need for more research into clinical practices in
the community to understand how the specific complexities of managing potentially acutely unwell
patients within their own home environment affects education and learning needs for community
healthcare professionals. The Sepsis Trust’s community nursing sepsis screening tool provides an
evidence informed approach to the identification and early recognition of patients with signs and
symptoms of sepsis. Implementation of this screening tool is likely to improve the consistent
approach to early identification of both red and amber flags in a patient with an underlying infective
process. There is evidence to demonstrate the improved clinical outcomes and reduced mortality
rates in patients with sepsis.
References:
Abrashkin, K.A., Poku, A., Ramjit, A., Washko, J., Zhang, J., Guttenberg, M., Smith, K.L., 2019.
Community paramedics treat high acuity conditions in the home: a prospective
observational study. BMJ Support Palliat Care.
Allen, G., 2018. Think, could this be sepsis? InnovAiT: Education and Inspiration for General Practice.
11 (10), 7.
Bain, H., Moggach, A., 2019. Supporting the district nurse to consolidate advanced clinical skills. Br J
Community Nurs 24 (4), 153.
Baker, E., Facultad, J.L., Slade, H., Lee, G., 2021. A new tool to measure acuity in the community: a
case study. Br J Community Nurs 26 (10), 482-492.
Brangan, E., Banks, J., Brant, H., Pullyblank, A., Le Roux, H., Redwood, S., 2018. Using the National
Early Warning Score (NEWS) outside acute hospital settings: a qualitative study of staff
experiences in the West of England. BMJ Open 8 (10), e022528.
Burdick, H., Pino, E., Gabel-Comeau, D., McCoy, A., Gu, C., Roberts, J., Le, S., Slote, J., Pellegrini, E.,
Green-Saxena, A., Hoffman, J., Das, R., 2020. Effect of a sepsis prediction algorithm on
patient mortality, length of stay and readmission: a prospective multicentre clinical
outcomes evaluation of real-world patient data from US hospitals. BMJ Health Care Inform
27 (1).
Dondorp, A.M., Dünser, M.W., Schultz, M.J., 2019. Sepsis Management in Resource-limited Settings.
In.
Edwards, P.J., Bennett-Britton, I., Ridd, M.J., Booker, M., Barnes, R.K., 2021. Factors affecting the
documentation of spoken safety-netting advice in routine GP consultations: a cross-sectional
study. Br J Gen Pract 71 (712), e869-e876.
Edwards, P.J., Ridd, M.J., Sanderson, E., Barnes, R.K., 2019. Safety netting in routine primary care
consultations: an observational study using video-recorded UK consultations. Br J Gen Pract
69 (689), e878-e886.
Feist, B., 2019. Screening for sepsis: SIRS or qSOFA? A literature review. Emerg Nurse 27 (6), 13-18.
Floer, M., Ziegler, M., Lenkewitz, B., Auer, A., Meister, T., 2021. Out-of-hospital sepsis recognition by
paramedics improves the course of disease and mortality: A single center retrospective
study. Adv Clin Exp Med 30 (11), 1115-1125.
Hantrakun, V., Somayaji, R., Teparrukkul, P., Boonsri, C., Rudd, K., Day, N.P.J., West, T.E.,
Limmathurotsakul, D., 2018. Clinical epidemiology and outcomes of community acquired
infection and sepsis among hospitalized patients in a resource limited setting in Northeast
Thailand: A prospective observational study (Ubon-sepsis). PLoS One 13 (9), e0204509.
Hunt, A., 2019. Sepsis: an overview of the signs, symptoms, diagnosis, treatment and
pathophysiology. Emerg Nurse 27 (5), 32-41.
Husabø, G., Nilsen, R.M., Flaatten, H., Solligård, E., Frich, J.C., Bondevik, G.T., Braut, G.S., Walshe, K.,
Harthug, S., Hovlid, E., 2021. Correction: Early diagnosis of sepsis in emergency departments,
time to treatment, and association with mortality: An observational study. PLoS One 16 (3),
e0248879.
Inada-Kim, M., Knight, T., Sullivan, M., Ainsworth-Smith, M., Pike, N., Richardson, M., Hayward, G.,
Lasserson, D., 2020. The prognostic value of national early warning scores (NEWS) during
transfer of care from community settings to hospital: a retrospective service evaluation.
BJGP Open 4 (2).
Iwashyna, T.J., Cooke, C.R., Wunsch, H., Kahn, J.M., 2012. Population burden of long-term
survivorship after severe sepsis in older Americans. J Am Geriatr Soc 60 (6), 1070-1077.
Iwashyna, T.J., Ely, E.W., Smith, D.M., Langa, K.M., 2010. Long-term cognitive impairment and
functional disability among survivors of severe sepsis. JAMA 304 (16), 1787-1794.
Jabaley, C.S., Blum, J.M., Groff, R.F., O'Reilly-Shah, V.N., 2018. Global trends in the awareness of
sepsis: insights from search engine data between 2012 and 2017. Crit Care 22 (1), 7.
Kabi, A., Mohanty, A., Kumar, S.K., Singh, V., Jha, M.K., Gupta, P., 2020. Clinical spectrum and risk
factors for hospital-acquired septicemia in a tertiary care centre of North-East India. J Family
Med Prim Care 9 (8), 3949-3954.
Kim, H.I., Park, S., 2019. Sepsis: Early Recognition and Optimized Treatment. Tuberc Respir Dis
(Seoul) 82 (1), 6-14.
Kopczynska, M., Sharif, B., Cleaver, S., Spencer, N., Kurani, A., Lee, C., Davis, J., Durie, C., Joseph-
Gubral, J., Sharma, A., Allen, L., Atkins, B., Gordon, A., Jones, L., Noble, A., Bradley, M.,
Atkinson, H., Inns, J., Penney, H., Gilbert, C., Walford, R., Pike, L., Edwards, R., Howcroft, R.,
Preston, H., Gee, J., Doyle, N., Maden, C., Smith, C., Azis, N.S.N., Vadivale, N., Battle, C.,
Lyons, R., Morgan, P., Pugh, R., Szakmany, T., Collaborators, W.D.D.C.P., 2018. Red-flag
sepsis and SOFA identifies different patient population at risk of sepsis-related deaths on the
general ward. Medicine (Baltimore) 97 (49), e13238.
Lin, Y., 2021. Effectiveness of the sepsis six bundle in the management of acute adult sepsis in the
UK. Emerg Nurse 29 (2), 26-29.
Marshall, H., Sprung, S., 2016. Community nurse's knowledge, confidence and experience of the
Mental Capacity Act in practice. Br J Community Nurs 21 (12), 615-622.
Massey, D., Chaboyer, W., Anderson, V., 2017. What factors influence ward nurses' recognition of
and response to patient deterioration? An integrative review of the literature. Nurs Open 4
(1), 6-23.
Mulders, M.C.F., Loots, F.J., van Nieuwenhoven, J., Ter Maaten, J.C., Bouma, H.R., 2021. Use of
sepsis-related diagnostic criteria in primary care: a survey among general practitioners. Fam
Pract 38 (5), 617-622.
NCEPOD, 2015. Just Say Sepsis! A review of the Process of Care Received by Patients with Sepsis. .
NCEPOD.
Nutbeam, T., Daniels, R., 2020. SCREENING AND ACTION TOOL FOR COMMUNITY NURSES. The Sepsis
Trust.
Olander, A., Bremer, A., Sundler, A.J., Hagiwara, M.A., Andersson, H., 2021. Assessment of patients
with suspected sepsis in ambulance services: a qualitative interview study. BMC Emerg Med
21 (1), 45.
Prescott, H.C., Angus, D.C., 2018. Enhancing Recovery From Sepsis: A Review. JAMA 319 (1), 62-75.
Pullyblank, A., Tavaré, A., Little, H., Redfern, E., le Roux, H., Inada-Kim, M., Cheema, K., Cook, A.,
Collaborative, W.o.E.P.S., 2020. Implementation of the National Early Warning Score in
patients with suspicion of sepsis: evaluation of a system-wide quality improvement project.
Br J Gen Pract 70 (695), e381-e388.
Raleigh, M., Allan, H., 2017. A qualitative study of advanced nurse practitioners' use of physical
assessment skills in the community: shifting skills across professional boundaries. J Clin Nurs
26 (13-14), 2025-2035.
Rudd, K.E., Johnson, S.C., Agesa, K.M., Shackelford, K.A., Tsoi, D., Kievlan, D.R., Colombara, D.V.,
Ikuta, K.S., Kissoon, N., Finfer, S., Fleischmann-Struzek, C., Machado, F.R., Reinhart, K.K.,
Rowan, K., Seymour, C.W., Watson, R.S., West, T.E., Marinho, F., Hay, S.I., Lozano, R., Lopez,
A.D., Angus, D.C., Murray, C.J.L., Naghavi, M., 2020. Global, regional, and national sepsis
incidence and mortality, 1990-2017: analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study. Lancet
395 (10219), 200-211.
Rumbus, Z., Matics, R., Hegyi, P., Zsiboras, C., Szabo, I., Illes, A., Petervari, E., Balasko, M., Marta, K.,
Miko, A., Parniczky, A., Tenk, J., Rostas, I., Solymar, M., Garami, A., 2017. Fever Is Associated
with Reduced, Hypothermia with Increased Mortality in Septic Patients: A Meta-Analysis of
Clinical Trials. PLoS One 12 (1), e0170152.
Schroeder, K., Chan, W., Fahey, T., 2011. Recognizing Red Flags in General Practice. InnovAiT:
Education and inspiration for general practice. 4 (3), 5.
Scott, H.F., Greenwald, E.E., Bajaj, L., Deakyne Davies, S.J., Brou, L., Kempe, A., 2018. The Sensitivity
of Clinician Diagnosis of Sepsis in Tertiary and Community-Based Emergency Settings. J
Pediatr 195, 220-227.e221.
Singer, M., Deutschman, C.S., Seymour, C.W., Shankar-Hari, M., Annane, D., Bauer, M., Bellomo, R.,
Bernard, G.R., Chiche, J.D., Coopersmith, C.M., Hotchkiss, R.S., Levy, M.M., Marshall, J.C.,
Martin, G.S., Opal, S.M., Rubenfeld, G.D., van der Poll, T., Vincent, J.L., Angus, D.C., 2016. The
Third International Consensus Definitions for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA 315
(8), 801-810.
Torsvik, M., Gustad, L.T., Mehl, A., Bangstad, I.L., Vinje, L.J., Damås, J.K., Solligård, E., 2016. Early
identification of sepsis in hospital inpatients by ward nurses increases 30-day survival. Crit
Care 20 (1), 244.
Tucker, G., Lusher, A., 2018. The use of early warning scores to recognise and respond to patient
deterioration in district nursing. Br J Community Nurs 23 (2), 76-79.
Vincent, J.L., 2016. The Clinical Challenge of Sepsis Identification and Monitoring. PLoS Med 13 (5),
e1002022.
Wiewel, M.A., Harmon, M.B., van Vught, L.A., Scicluna, B.P., Hoogendijk, A.J., Horn, J., Zwinderman,
A.H., Cremer, O.L., Bonten, M.J., Schultz, M.J., van der Poll, T., Juffermans, N.P., Wiersinga,
W.J., 2016. Risk factors, host response and outcome of hypothermic sepsis. Crit Care 20 (1),
328.
Figure 1 Click here to download Figure (i.e. diagram, illustration, photo)
Figure_1.jpg
Table 1 Click here to download Table Table1_RedFlags.docx
Table 1: Red and Amber Flags for Sepsis
Red Flags for sepsis Amber flags for sepsis
New confusion/altered mental state Relatives are concerned about a change in
mental status
Systolic blood pressure ≤90mmHg (or a drop of Systolic Blood Pressure 91-100mmHg
>40 mmHg from baseline blood pressure)
Heart Rate ≥130 per minute Heart Rate 91-130 or new dysrhythmia
Respiratory Rate ≥ 25 per minute Respiratory rate 21-24 per minute
Not passed urine in 18 hours (if catheterised Acute deterioration of functional ability
<0.5ml/kg/hr)
New oxygen demand Immunosuppressed
[needs supplemental oxygen to keep SpO ≥92%
2
(or 88% in COPD)]
Non-blanching rash/skin mottling/ ashen skin Trauma/Surgery/interventional procedure in the
tone/ or cyanosis. last 8 weeks
Recent chemotherapy Temperature <36.0°C
Clinical signs of an infected wound
Table Click here to download Table Table2_SepsisSix.docx
Table 2: An overview of the sepsis six care bundle (Lin, 2021, Nutbeam and Daniels, 2020).
Sepsis-Six care bundle: Clinical Reasoning: Why is this important:
Commence oxygen Aim to keep saturations >94% In sepsis, oxygen supply and
therapy (high flow If COPD and at risk of CO retention aim demand is not matched,
2
oxygen using a non- for oxygen saturations 88-92%) causing a critical imbalance.
rebreathe-mask) Correcting low oxygen
saturations can help to
reduce tissue hypoxia
Take and send Blood Think about potential source of the Tests help clinicians to
Cultures underlying infection – consider sending understand the severity of
urine/sputum/wound samples for the problem and stratify risk.
microscopy, culture, and sensitivity This involves identifying the
(MC&S). causative pathogen to
The patient should have a minimum enable effective treatments
septic screen including peripheral blood to be commenced.
cultures, urine and a chest x-ray.
Initiate intravenous Follow local anti-microbial guidelines. Giving antibiotics helps to
antibiotics Consider allergies prior to control the source of the
administration. infection which reduces the
stimulus to the immune
system
Initiate intravenous If hypotensive/lactate >2mmol/l or Hypovolaemia contributes to
fluids acute kidney injury (AKI) commence shock in sepsis. Temporarily
fluids up to 30ml/kg in 10ml/kg aliquots. restoring fluid volumes can
Give 500mls stat if no AKI, not help correct until additional
hypotensive and lactate normal. treatments can be
established.
Measurement of If lactate >4mmol/l monitor after Lactate is a product of
lactate administration of each 10ml/kg fluid anaerobic metabolism and
challenge. therefore represents the
Lactate of >4mmol/l is indicative of early extent of poor oxygen
admission to intensive care. delivery to the cells in the
Re-measure any lactate in the presence patient.
of any sign of deterioration
Measurement of urine Hourly urine measurement is required, Urine output provides an
output and catheterisation is required. important measure of
Ensure that fluid balance chart is physiological status and
commenced and completed hourly. often is an early indicator of
deterioration. Aim for a
urine output of 0.5
ml/kg/hour.
Reviewer Response Table Click here to view linked References
Reviewer Comments/Author Responses table:
Reviewer Comment: Author Response:
Reviewer 1:
This is a narrative review of the use of the Thank you for your review.
Sepsis Trust Screening tool for the community
diagnosis of sepsis. It should be remembered
that whilst the Sepsis Trust tools are commonly
advertised, they are not used throughout
hospital practice. They are sensible but have
not been validated. Nevertheless, the earlier
that sepsis is treated with antibiotics, the better
the outcome. This tool is also useful for
recognising a sick patient.
I find the narrative a little directionless at times Narrative and content reviewed prior to
and there is an excess of words; it would resubmission.
benefit from having aims and objectives,
background, rationale and use.
The paragraph on P4 : "Recognising sepsis in Narrative and content reviewed prior to
the community setting" is repeats some of resubmission.
what was said at the beginning
Personally, I would put the paragraph on P8 I have considered this but as the aim of the
"But what does sepsis look like?" earlier to put article is to walk readers through using the
the screening tool in context. Some of the list Sepsis Trusts community nursing sepsis
that follows in this paragraph probably relate to recognition tool I have decided to keep the
septic shock too. order suggested as this will hopefully be clear
to the reader.
P3 "The NCEPOD report also identified that The word ‘setting’ has been removed in this
around 70% of sepsis cases originated in the sentence.
community setting. In a healthcare model
whereby increasing numbers of acutely unwell By using setting, I was aiming to be clear about
patients are manged within the community what I mean by the word community which at
setting," Do we really need the word 'setting'? times would otherwise be ambiguous.
It is repeated a lot!
P7: NEWS2 are readers going to know what The following sentence has been added to
NEWS2 is? Does it need introducing address this and add clarity:
“The NEWS2 score is a simple risk stratification
score which measures the potential for
deterioration and critical illness and is
calculated from the culmination of scores
associated with each vital sign (Respiratory
Rate, Oxygen Saturations, Pulse, Blood
Pressure, Temperature and Level of
Consciousness).”
P7: "As there is limited access to secondary This has been amended within the manuscript
data in the community setting, clinicians need
to use the examination process to elicit clinical
signs which may help in the identification of the
symptoms of sepsis (Olander et al.,2021)." Do
you just mean "Community clinicians are
unable to easily access investigations and so
need to rely on clinical judgement"?
P12: "definitive care setting" why? why not say This has been amended in the manuscript.
"hospital"?
Reviewer 2:
A very well written and comprehensive article. I Thank you for your review.
was particularly pleased to see how much
effort was put into the significance of clinical
assessment along with the assessment tool.
A few minor comments only, on page 11, a
typographical error HitH should be changed to This abbreviation has been removed as it is not
HatH used elsewhere in the manuscript.
Table 1 also i believe is confusing in its format. On refection I agree that this is confusing.
It is meant to be an overview of three separate
lists, the sepsis six, the red and the amber flag I have revised the table and split it into two
signs, but in the way it is created it is confusing separate tables. The first, presents both the red
and could create the impression that specific and amber flags for sepsis and the second
interventions of the sepsis six target specific presents the Sepsis-Six care bundle. I have
red or amber flag signs. I believe it could added additional columns to table 2 to provide
benefit from some redesigning, or potentially further information about the clinical reasoning
separate the columns completely? and why it is important.
Otherwise, a very informative and useful Thank you.
article, with useful and realistic information for
healthcare professionals