TYPE PolicyandPracticeReviews
PUBLISHED 09May2024
DOI 10.3389/fmed.2024.1379852
Cybersecurity policy framework
requirements for the
OPENACCESS
EDITEDBY establishment of highly
OyaBeyan,
UniversityHospitalofCologne,Germany
interoperable and
REVIEWEDBY
ChristosIlioudis,
InternationalHellenicUniversity,Greece interconnected health
NikolaosPolatidis,
UniversityofBrighton,UnitedKingdom
data spaces
*CORRESPONDENCE
ChristianLuidold
christian.luidold@univie.ac.at
RECEIVED31January2024 ChristianLuidold* andChristophJungbauer
ACCEPTED23April2024
PUBLISHED09May2024
FacultyofComputerScience,MultimediaInformationSystems,UniversityofVienna,Vienna,Austria
CITATION
LuidoldCandJungbauerC(2024)
Cybersecuritypolicyframeworkrequirements
This paper examines cybersecurity policy framework requirements for
fortheestablishmentofhighlyinteroperable
andinterconnectedhealthdataspaces. establishing highly interoperable and interconnected health data spaces,
Front.Med.11:1379852. withafocusontheEuropeanHealthDataSpace(EHDS)anditscorresponding
doi:10.3389/fmed.2024.1379852
joint action Toward European Health Data Space (TEHDAS). It explores
COPYRIGHT the challenges of ensuring data security within an increasingly digital and
©2024 LuidoldandJungbauer.Thisisan
collaborative healthcare environment, emphasizing the need for robust policy
open-accessarticledistributedunderthe
termsoftheCreativeCommonsAttribution management to protect sensitive health information across diverse healthcare
License(CCBY).Theuse,distributionor systems and supply chains. Through an analysis of use cases and held expert
reproductioninotherforumsispermitted,
workshops, the study identifies key requirements for enhancing cybersecurity
providedtheoriginalauthor(s)andthe
copyrightowner(s)arecreditedandthatthe measures,fosteringcross-borderdataexchange,andensuringcompliancewith
originalpublicationinthisjournaliscited,in regulatory standards. It illustrates the practical implications of cybersecurity
accordancewithacceptedacademicpractice.
policies in a real-world scenario, demonstrating how they can be applied to
Nouse,distributionorreproductionis
permittedwhichdoesnotcomplywiththese enhancedatasecurityandpolicyeffectiveness.
terms.
KEYWORDS
cybersecurity in healthcare, health data interoperability, risk management in health
organizations,healthdataprivacy,digitalhealthecosystems
1 Introduction
In this paper, we analyze cybersecurity policy framework requirements for highly
interoperableandinterconnectedhealthdataspaces,withafocusontheEuropeanHealth
DataSpace(EHDS)(EDHS)1project“TowardEuropeanHealthDataSpace”(TEHDAS).2
We explore the significant challenges of securing data within an increasingly digital
and collaborative healthcare environment. Our research leverages expert workshops
and multiple use cases in a healthcare setting from the SPHINX project (1) to identify
key requirements for enhancing cybersecurity measures, supporting cross-border data
exchange, and ensuring compliance with regulatory standards. Each contribution is
designedtoofferactionableinsightsforpolicymakersandstakeholdersinthehealthcare
sector.
1 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex:52022PC0197
2 https://tehdas.eu/
FrontiersinMedicine 01 frontiersin.org
LuidoldandJungbauer 10.3389/fmed.2024.1379852
1.1 Cybersecurity policy management at adapt cybersecurity management policies (e.g., relating to risk
different levels management and business continuity, incident management) to
keepupwiththecontinuouslychangingthreatandattacklandscape
Effective policy management at all levels includes the requires a new and more dynamic approach to policy definition
development, implementation, monitoring, and enforcement of andconstantre-evaluationagainsttherequirementsdefinedbythe
policiesandbestpractices.Thisisextendedbyperiodicassessments cybersecurityrealities,asisreportedbythreatintelligenceprovided
in order to ensure their relevance and validity supported by by, e.g., NIS competent authorities/CSIRTs or threat intelligence
collaboration and communication between affected stakeholders. communities.
Belowwebrieflydescribecybersecuritypolicymanagementatan Theproposedpolicymanagementframeworkwillcover:
organizational,interorganizational,andecosystemlevel.
1. Supportforpolicyrequirementassessmentanddefinition,based
Organizational level: The main focus regarding policy
ontheindividualsocio-technicalrequirementsoforganizations.
management at an organizational level lies in the development
This will be based on the socio-technical soft systems analysis
and implementation of policies as guidelines pertaining to the
conductedduringtheCS-AWARE-NEXTproject.4
organization’s cybersecurity processes and practices in order to
2. Adynamicanddatadrivencontinuousre-assessmentofpolicy
ensure compliance. Subjects included involve but are not limited
requirements using AI to dynamically reassess cybersecurity
to access control and incident response encompassing constant
policiesthroughcontinuousdata-drivenanalysis.Byintegrating
monitoringandenforcementofthosepolicies.
Argyris’doublelooplearningmodel(4),itallowsforadaptive
Ecosystemlevel:Regardingpolicymanagementatanecosystem
policy execution and adjustments based on evolving threats,
level, the goal lies in the process of coordination of policies and
with the inner loop focusing on execution and the outer loop
practicesbetweeninterconnectedorganizationsinordertoaddress
onpolicymodificationitself.
shared risks. Main subjects include but are not limited to risks
3. A decision support and management model that aids
pertaining to the supply chain and third-party risk management,
organizations in efficiently implementing and dynamically
and involve a given degree of collaboration concerning the
adjusting policies during cybersecurity incidents. It integrates
developmentandimplementationofpoliciesandpractices.
the OODA Loop–Observe, Orient, Decide, Act–a model (5)
Global level: Policy management at the global level focuses
suited for rapid and informed decision-making in dynamic
on the process of coordination of policies and practices between
environments.Itinformsadjustmentsanddecision-makingby
interdependentorganizationswithinabroaderscaleencompassing
monitoring threat intelligence and internal systems, analyzing
entire sectors, e.g., critical infrastructures. Main subjects include
risks, and ensuring the explainability of actions through
but are not limited to information sharing and CTI in order to
contextualization.
address cybersecurity risks. On the global level the collaboration
involves parties from industry and government regarding the Thegoalistoevaluatethepotentialfortighterintegrationofthe
developmentandimplementationofcybersecuritypolicies. dynamic operational cybersecurity management capabilities that
CS-AWAREalreadyprovideswiththeorganizationalcomponent
that is defined by the policies. The piloting evaluation of the
1.2 Aim and context of the research CS-AWARE project has shown that there is great potential in
streamlining those two aspects, which requires a more dynamic
approachtopolicymanagement.
The goal of our research work was to develop a data driven
Thispaperfocusesontherequirementsanalysisregardingthe
and risk-aware cybersecurity policy management framework for
development of risk-aware cybersecurity policy management. It
publicorganizationswithanemphasisonhealth.Theframework
buildsupontheresultsoftheconductedend-userworkshopswith
takes a systemic-holistic view on policy management, and is
pilotpartnersfromLarissainGreece.Thissectioncontinueswith
driven by organizational and user requirements, building on the
themotivationandrelevancepertainingtorisk-awarecybersecurity
integrationofprovendecisionandorganizationallearningmodels
policy management and a brief description of the classification
withartificialintelligenceconcepts.Previousexperience(especially
of its usage at different levels. Section 2 we present a state-of-
during piloting and evaluation of the CS-AWARE project3) has
the-art analysis focusing on current trends and advances from a
shown that current approaches to policy management are not
legal standpoint comprising of current standards and guidelines,
adequately addressing the dynamic nature of the cybersecurity
followedbyinitiativesfromaffectingeffectivepolicymanagement.
environment (2) and requires further research in enhancing
Additionally, key scientific work pertaining to planned design
cybersecurity awareness, as well as in increasing the potential of
decisionsispresentedinmoredetail.Section3examinescurrent
interoperabilityoforganizationsbeyondmeredataexchange(3).
challengesofimplementingeffectivepolicymanagementfromthe
The dynamic nature of cybersecurity is already challenging
points of transparency, information sharing, and responsibility
on an operational level. It becomes increasingly unmanageable
and accountability. Section 4 presents the main key requirement
at the policy level, especially for public sector organizations
specificationfromtheresultsoftheend-userworkshops,followed
and institutions that handle personal and sensitive data as it is
bytheconclusionsinSection5.
the case of health service providers, hospitals, clinical research
and care centers, etc. The need to quickly and dynamically
3 https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/740723 4 https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/101069543
FrontiersinMedicine 02 frontiersin.org
LuidoldandJungbauer 10.3389/fmed.2024.1379852
2 Current trends and advances in
Thefollowingdescribesthefundamentalaspectsofeachinstance
risk-aware cybersecurity policy relevanttothisproject:
Starting with the GDPR (titled “General Data Protection
management
Regulation”),5thefocusinthecontextofthisdocumentliesinthe
handlingandprocessingofdatabycontrollersandtheassociated
Current trends regarding cybersecurity policy management
rightsofdatasubjects.
are heavily influenced by the effects of legal frameworks
including regulations, standards, directives, and laws. Given a • Right to data portability (Art. 20 GDPR) states that the
shifttowardincreasinglyplacingresponsibilitiesontheindividual
data subject shall have the right to receive data concerning
organizations, particularly the senior management, an increased
themselvesprovidedtoacontrollerandtransmitthedatato
presenceofcybersecuritymeasurescanbenoted.Ageneraltrend
anothercontrollerinamachine-readableway.Theprocessing
is the usage of machine learning and artificial intelligence to
hastobecarriedoutinanautomatedway.
implementandsupportnewandexistingcybersecuritymeasures. • Representativesofcontrollersorprocessorsnotestablished
Following is a non-exhaustive description of current trends and
in the Union (Art. 27 GDPR) states that the controllers or
advances:
processorsneedtodesignateinwritingarepresentativeinthe
European Union, more precisely in a member state, where
• Proactive risk management is aimed at preventing cyber
the data subjects, whose personal data are processed. The
attacks before they occur instead of merely responding to
obligationofhavingadesignatedrepresentativedoesnotapply
them and their fallout as they arise. The main approach
topublicauthoritiesorbodies.
lies in implementing effective policies and risk management • Processing under the authority of the controller or
strategies.
processor(Art.29GDPR)statesthattheprocessorandany
• The focus on risk assessment forms a crucial component
personactingundertheauthorityofthecontrollerorofthe
foreffectivecybersecuritypolicymanagementbysupporting
processor having access to personal data shall not process
organizations to identify potential vulnerabilities and
thosedataexceptoninstructionsfromthecontroller,unless
facilitating decision making concerning the prioritization of
requiredtodosobyUnionorMemberStatelaw.
assetsecurity. • Securityofprocessing(Art32GDPR),specificallyArt32(2)
• The automation of policy management streamlines the
states that in assessing the appropriate level of security
process of creating, implementing, and enforcing policies.
account shall be taken in particular of the risks that are
Byaddingprocessestoincludemonitoringandmaintenance
presented by processing, in particular from accidental or
during execution, freed resources can effectively be used to
unlawfuldestruction,loss,alteration,unauthorizeddisclosure
focusonmorecomplexchallenges.
of,oraccesstopersonaldatatransmitted,storedorotherwise
• The integration of threat intelligence alleviates the efforts
processed.
of organizations to stay ahead of emerging threats and
facilitates timely responses to security incidents. Threat
TheNIS2Directive6 (titled“Directiveonmeasuresforahigh
intelligence comprise collections of data and results of
commonlevelofcybersecurityacrosstheUnion”)isanEU-wide
corresponding analyses about security incidents and
legislation on cybersecurity focusing on active risk management.
vulnerabilities from various sources shared on various
It expands the scope of the original NIS Directive from 8 to 16
levels by entities including government agencies, CSIRTs,
sectorsandremovesthethresholdforapplicabilityofthedirective
organizations,andcommunities.
regarding the size of an organization of its corresponding sector.
• Collaboration and information sharing constitutes a
Furthermore, it requires improved risk management approaches,
driving factor regarding enhanced cybersecurity resilience
more stringent reporting obligations, harmonized sanctions, and
and timely response to security incidents. It includes
enhancedcooperationwithauthoritiesandCSIRTs.
various organizations, governmental bodies, CSIRTs and
The ISO/IEC 27001:2022 (titled “Information security,
communities working together involving sharing best
cybersecurity and privacy protection - Information security
practices, collaborating on issues, and coordinating actions
management systems - Requirements”) is a European standard
pertainedtosecurityincidents.
pertaining to IT security and management systems. It specifies
the requirements for establishing, implementing, maintaining
Incorporatingtheabovetrendsandadvancesintocybersecurity
and continually improving an information security management
policy management can help to enhance the resilience of
system within an organizational context. These requirements
organizationsbysupportingtheprotectionofassetsandincrease
are generic and intended to be applicable to all organizations,
thepreparednessagainstemergingcybersecuritythreats.
regardless of type, size, or nature. The corresponding ISO/IEC
27002:2022 (titled “Information security, cybersecurity and
privacy protection - Information security controls”) standard7
2.1 Standards and guidelines
The requirements for CS-AWARE-NEXT are in part heavily 5 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679
influenced by current standards and guidelines with the most 6 http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2022/2555/oj/eng
prominentbeingtheGDPR,NIS2,ISO27001,andtheNISTCSF. 7 https://www.iso.org/standard/82875.html
FrontiersinMedicine 03 frontiersin.org
LuidoldandJungbauer 10.3389/fmed.2024.1379852
provides a reference set of generic IT security controls including research conducted in the field of cloud security, as well as
implementationguidance,whichcanbeusedforthedevelopment providingnetworkingopportunitiesformembers.
of organization-specific information security management The latest pivotal initiative in the context of this paper is
guidelines,aswellasimplementinginformationsecuritycontrols the EHDS by the EU. The proposition aims for granting natural
according to best practices. These standards are relevant to risk- persons a higher degree of control over their electronic health
awarecybersecuritymanagementastheyprovideacomprehensive data. By ensuring a common legal framework across the EU
frameworkformanagingcybersecurityrisks. it would enhance the quality of healthcare-related services, as
The Cybersecurity Framework by the National Institute well as creating a single market with agglomerated healthcare
of Standards and Technology (NIST CSF)8 provides initial data made available in a preprocessed format for researchers,
guidelines for improving cybersecurity risk management in innovators, and policy-makers. This shall be achieved through
critical infrastructures, pointing out its relevance to risk-aware establishing strong cybersecurity measures focused on the aspect
cybersecurity management. It includes five framework functions of data exchange within a highly interoperable environment.
as its core structure: Identify, Protect, Detect, Respond, and In conjunction with TEHDAS the new proposition also focuses
Recover. With the update to CSF2.0,9 scheduled for Winter on an increased stakeholder engagement encompassing different
2024, the framework is set to provide a more extensive guidance roles and expertise, as well as to support the process of
regarding implementation, including more specific information collaboratively developing and implementing effective policies
aboutdefinitions,applications,andinteroperability.Additionally, includingcybersecuritypolicies.
a new theme to be included is the consideration of cybersecurity
risksinsupplychainsintheCSF.
2.3 Scientific works
2.2 Initiatives from industry, government,
Main considerations pertaining to design decisions and their
and professional organizations implementationofarisk-awarecybersecuritypolicymanagement
framework within this WP are taken from established methods.
Current initiatives regarding risk-aware cybersecurity policy Taking the standards and guidelines, as well as the current
management can be found from industry, government, and initiatives from the previous subsections into account, the key
professional organizations. Their goal lies in increasing the scientificworksiscomposedofthefollowingresearch:
resilience against cyberattacks and raising awareness concerning The core concept of effective policy management including
thepresentlychangingthreatlandscape,aswellasbestpractices, the performance monitoring of individual policies is defined by
standards and regulations. Initiatives focus on various aspects the double-loop learning model developed by C. Argyris, which
of risk-aware cybersecurity policy management, including risk can be applied to a variety of contexts, including education,
assessment, policy development and enforcement, collaboration, personal growth and development, and organizational change. It
informationsharing,anddecision-makingprocesses. describesalearningprocessinwhichindividualsandorganizations
Prominent examples of initiatives from industry include the critically examine and question the underlying assumptions and
NISTCybersecurityFrameworkforhelpingorganizationstobetter values regarding their actions and decisions. The results of an
understandandimprovetheirmanagementofcybersecurityrisks. effective implementation can lead to more efficient and lasting
While it was originally developed for critical infrastructures, learning and growth effects. In the context of this research
many countries across the globe have adopted and adapted two main types of learning were identified: single-loop learning
the Cybersecurity Framework with some considering its use as and double-loop learning. Single-loop learning occurs when an
mandatoryforbothprivateandpublicsector. individual or organization works to correct or improve actions
Regarding initiatives from governments, the European oroutcomeswithoutquestioningtheunderlyingassumptionsand
Union’s GDPR and NIS2 (the latter specifically targeting critical valuesregardingtheirbehavior.Itisfocusedonsolvingproblems
infrastructures) have caused a significant impact on managing instead of exploring the causes of those problems. Double-loop
cybersecurity risks. They include provisions for data protection learning involves a deeper level of analysis and questioning by
andcybersecurity,aswellasrequiringorganizationstoimplement requiringindividualsandorganizationstocriticallyexaminetheir
technical and organizational measures to ensure an appropriate assumptions and values pertaining to their actions and decisions
standardconcerningcybersecurity. and questioning their validity and appropriateness. Beyond just
Initiativesfromprofessionalorganizationscommonlyinclude involving actions regarding correction or improvement, its view
education material and certification programs in the domain alsoinvolvesquestioningandpotentiallychangingthefundamental
of cybersecurity. Organizations like the Cloud Security Alliance values(4).
(CSA)10additionallyprovidepublicationsanddocumentsonlatest Research conducted by J. Boyd explores mental patterns or
concepts of meaning pertaining to individuals to shape and be
shaped by a changing environment. The identified basic goal of
8 https://www.nist.gov/cyberframework everyone lies in improving the capacity for independent action.
9 https://www.nist.gov/cyberframework/updating-nist-cybersecurity- Any level of cooperation or competition exists to satisfy this
framework-journey-csf-20 aim. If a desired level of independence cannot be achieved,
10 https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/ compromisesaretaken,andconstraintsaredevelopedinorderto
FrontiersinMedicine 04 frontiersin.org
LuidoldandJungbauer 10.3389/fmed.2024.1379852
collectivelypoolskillsandtalentstoovercomeorremoveobstacles. Giventhefactthatcybersecurityriskwouldgenerallybefoundon
Ifovercomingorremovingstillprovestobeimpossiblethegroup thelowerendoftheriskhierarchyitisoftenabsentfromcentralized
might alienate and lose members for whom these hindrances are riskmanagementprocesses.Despitefocusingontechnologicalrisks
deemedimportant.Inordertostrengthenalliancespursuingtheir stemmingfromsoftware,thepredominantdrivingfactorforrisks
goals,effectivedecisionshavetobetakenandresultingactionsare inoperationishumanerror.Softwareengineersmorecommonly
tobemonitored.Thiscreatesaneedfordecisionmodelsdeveloped tendtoexercisetheirauthoritytobypasssoftwarerestrictionsand
forconstantlychangingenvironments.Beforenewmodelscanbe thereforeinhibitdevelopedsecuritymeasures.
implemented,existingmodelsorconcepts,whichmightinhibitthe Cybersecurity constitutes a crucial challenge for the health
newoneneedtobeseparatedfromtherestofitsassociateddomain sector since it influences the security, privacy, and quality of
and unstructured by a mental concept coined as “destructive the provision of healthcare services, especially in interconnected
deduction”. The subsequent restructuring and creation of new systems and services, as aimed by the EHDS. Nonetheless,
modelsorconceptsbypiecingtogetherindividualbitstoconform handling cybersecurity risks in interdependent healthcare
to given needs was coined “creative induction”. The relation and organizations presents several challenges, which arise from
application of these mental concepts are employed to formulate the intricacy, heterogeneity, interconnectivity, dynamics, and
decision models for individuals and groups to determine and resource limitations of the sector. Therefore, a comprehensive
monitoractionstoaddressincidentsinchangingenvironmentsand and collaborative approach is essential for developing a risk-
thereforeimprovetheircapacityforindependentactions(6). aware policy management framework, enabling healthcare
The OODA (Observation-Orientation-Decision-Action) loop organizations the identification, assessment, prioritization, and
introducedbyBoydresultedfromtheefforttodescribethenature mitigation of cybersecurity risks while considering security and
ofadversarialengagements.OODAtimecycleorloopsuggeststhat usability requirements. It is crucial to involve all stakeholders
success in war depends on the ability to out-pace and out-think and align the framework with industry standards and best
theopponent,orputdifferently,ontheabilitytogothroughthe practices. Furthermore, the cybersecurity framework ought to
OODAcyclemorerapidlythantheopponent.Incybersecuritythe possess adaptability and flexibility to effectively manage the
process allows stakeholders to learn from previous experiences, dynamic and evolving cyber threats faced by the healthcare
feeding lessons learned into the loop activities to achieve better industry, while catering to the sector’s increasing needs
performancecontainsfoursteps.Eachgroupofstakeholdersmust andexpectations.
make observations and process those observations through the
orientation process, then use orientation in the decision process,
thenturnthedecisionsintoactions,whichinturnchangetheworld
3.1 Key challenges in health organizations
beingobserved.ThefocusoftheOODAloopisnotaboutmaking
fasterdecisions,butratheraboutmanipulatingtheenvironmentto
"inhibit an adversaries capacity to adapt to such an environment Information security risk assessment focuses on the potential
(suppressordistortobservations)".Theenvironmentisseenasa damage to data subjects regarding the confidentiality, integrity,
meansofdisorientationtodisrupttheadversary’sdecision-making. andavailabilityofdata.Theintegrationofnewsecuritymeasures
Rather than operating in isolation, decision and execution cycles is generally decided upon calculating the expected loss through
take place simultaneously, but not in synchronization, for both the sustained damage taken and comparing it to the cost of
sides. The conflict in the minds of the adversaries compromises implementation. Problems arise by nature of not knowing the
thecognitivedimensionoftheinformationenvironment.Adding actual performance of those security measures, making the
the cognitive dimension to cyberspace changes the analysis quantificationofcostsanissue.
of cyberspace operations from a search for vulnerabilities in Riskassessmentasamanagementtoolshouldbedistinguished
hardwareandsoftwareintoanengagementincludinginformation between risk management and security management. Risk
operations. “Situational awareness” is a term from psychology managementencompassesstrategiesinvolvedindecision-making
which describes both a field of study and the coupling of actors and the subsequent monitoring of the outcomes. Security
totheiroperatingenvironment.Situationalawarenessisknowing managementencompassesprograms,processes,etc.usedaccording
what’sgoingonaroundyou(7). tothedecisionsmadefromtheriskmanagement.Riskmanagement
thereforeconstitutestheintegralpartforcybersecuritypoliciesand
cybersecuritypolicymanagement(8).
3 Special challenges of risk-aware Themostprominentissuespertainingriskmanagementfocus
on the organizational responsibility to assess risks, individual
cybersecurity policy management in
responsibilities or segregation of duties and the role of the
interdependent health organizations
governmentregardingtheassuranceofeffectiveriskmanagement
practices. Specifically, the shift regarding the placement of
An important aspect of the EHDS is risk management, as responsibility on senior management governed the last years,
the proposal was specifically designed to take the NIS Directive predominantly through the GDPR, as well as NIS and the
intoaccounttoincludemeasurestomitigateidentifiedrisks.Risk upcomingNIS2.Thisshiftwastakenintoaccountindefiningthe
management typically focuses on credit risk, market risk, and proposition of the EDHS in the context of including a broader
operationsrisk.Technologyriskconstitutesasubsetofoperations spectrumofstakeholders,especiallyregardingpolicydevelopment
risk,andcybersecurityrisksubsequentlyisapartoftechnologyrisk. andprojectmanagement.
FrontiersinMedicine 05 frontiersin.org
LuidoldandJungbauer 10.3389/fmed.2024.1379852
Managing cybersecurity policies in interdependent health healthcare services, while promoting research and innovation
organizations can present unique challenges due to the in the health sector. However, the implementation of the EHDS
complex relationships and dependencies that exist between poses challenges for interdependent healthcare organizations in
these organizations. Listed below is an overview of special termsofrisk-consciouscybersecuritypolicymanagement.Inorder
challengesdeterminedduringtheend-userworkshopswhichcan to demonstrate the importance of cybersecurity management
ariseinthiscontext: a comprehensive scenario in a healthcare setting was created
Varying levels of cybersecurity maturity: Interdependent combining4usecasesfromtheHorizon2020projectSPHINX(1).
health organizations may have different levels of cybersecurity Thescenariocombinesthefollowingusecases:
maturity and understanding, which can make it difficult to
1. UC13:ExploitingRemotePatientMonitoringServices,
coordinatepoliciesandpracticeseffectively.Thedifferencebetween
2. UC24:TheftofPatientDatausingtheTelemedicineSystem,
smalllocalcompaniesandlargeorganizationsmightbeverylarge,
3. UC17:AccessingHealthDatafromaFitnessTracker,and
whichcanmakeitchallengingtoestablishacommonsetofpolicies
4. UC20: Compromised Workstation Allows the Scanning of
andstandards.
HospitalNetwork.
Limitedresources:Smalllocalhealthorganizationsmayhave
limitedresourcestoallocatetocybersecuritypolicymanagement, The complex scenario depicts a combination of exploitation
whichcanmakeitchallengingtoimplementandenforcepolicies of remote patient monitoring services and vulnerabilities in
effectively. This can be particularly challenging for smaller telemedicine systems leading to unauthorized access of health
healthcareinstitutionsthatmaynothavededicatedcybersecurity data, including data from fitness trackers. In conjunction with
stafforbudgets. compromised workstations the scenario evolves into a multi-
Complexinterdependencies:Differentregionalorganizations faceted cyber threat illustrating the dynamics of cybersecurity in
mayhavecomplexinterdependenciesthatcanmakeitchallenging healthcare, with a particular focus on emerging technologies and
to coordinate policies and practices. For example, a regional remote healthcare delivery. The unified scenario balances patient
healthcaresystemmayrelyonmultiplelocalclinicsandhospitals monitoring and data management together with cybersecurity
toprovidepatientcare,whichcanmakeitchallengingtoestablish measures to represent a necessary standard for integrating
common cybersecurity policies and practices across the entire technologyandsecuritytoenhancepatientcareandprivacy.
system. The following subsections give an overview of the individual
Regulatory and compliance requirements: Health usecasesfollowedbyananalysisofincludedissuesandproposed
organizations may be subject to different regulatory and relevantcybersecuritypolicies.
compliance requirements, which can make it challenging to
establish a common set of cybersecurity policies and practices.
For example, hospitals are subject to different data protection 3.2.1 UC13:exploitingremotepatientmonitoring
regulations than organizations in the food industry, which can services
make it challenging to establish common policies related to data Using a remote patient monitoring service, a patient uses a
protection. mobile App to read vital signs captured by medical devices and
Communication and coordination challenges: uploadtheunencrypteddataviaahomeWi-Firouter.Bycracking
Interdependent health organizations may face communication theweakpasswordandforcingcommunicationstonon-transport
and coordination challenges when trying to establish common layer security (TLS) mode a hacker was able to modify health-
cybersecurity policies and practices. This can be particularly relatedinformationsenttotheserver.Thisresultedintheattacker
challenging when organizations have different priorities or when compromisingthetrustanddataintegrityoftheprovidedmedical
there is limited communication and collaboration between services,creatingfalsealarmsandcausingemergencyactionsfrom
stakeholders. thepersonnelmonitoringthepatient.Ananalysisoftherelevant
Overall, managing cybersecurity policies in interdependent policiesisdepictedinTable1.
local and regional organizations requires a collaborative and
coordinatedapproachthattakesintoaccounttheuniquechallenges
3.2.2 UC24:theftofpatientdatausingthe
and dependencies that exist between these organizations. This
telemedicinesystem
mayinvolveestablishingcommonpoliciesandstandards,sharing
informationandresources,andinvestingincybersecuritytraining By exploiting a Web Real Time Communication (WebRTC)
andeducationforstaff. bug in a hospitals telemedicine service, an attacker was able to
stealthily connect to an active media session between a patient
andtheirdoctorusingaMan-in-the-Middle(MitM)attack.With
this the hacker was not only able to access the audio and video
3.2 A comprehensive scenario for secure
stream of the session but could also access and compromise the
digital healthcare patient’s Electronic Medical Record (EMR) data. The attacker
alsointroducedacrypto-ransomwareintothehospital’snetwork,
The European Health Data Space (EHDS) initiative, threatening to destroy patient data. This resulted in the loss of
implemented by the European Commission, aims to facilitate availability of healthcare databases, impacting or preventing IT-
secure and ethical utilization of health data throughout the EU. basedhealthcareservicesforupto2monthsandcompromisingthe
The EHDS is designed to improve the quality and efficiency of trustofpatientsintothehealthcareorganizationduetoviolating
FrontiersinMedicine 06 frontiersin.org
LuidoldandJungbauer 10.3389/fmed.2024.1379852
TABLE1 AnalysisofpoliciesinUC13.
Policyarea Currentstate Recommended Policymanagement Expectedoutcome
policy action
Encryptionstandards Patientvitalsignsdatanot Mandatoryuseofencryption Regularsecurityauditsto Enhancedsecurityofpatient
sentencrypted foralldatatransmissions ensureencryption datatransmission
implementation
Networkaccesscontrol HomeWiFirouterprotected Strongpasswordpolicyfor Implementpasswordstrength Preventionofunauthorized
byaweakpassword homeWiFirouter andcomplexitychecks networkaccess
Deviceauthentication Mobileappconnectstothe Mobileappmustauthenticate Firmwareupdatetoenforce Reductionintheriskof
InternetviahomeWiFirouter theremotepatient platformauthentication man-in-the-middleattacks
monitoringplatformbefore
uploadingdata
Dataintegrity Lackofverificationofdata Implementationofdata Continuousmonitoringfor Assuranceofaccuratepatient
receivedbytheremotepatient integritychecks dataanomalies vitalsignsdata
monitoringplatform
the confidentiality,integrity,andavailability ofthepatient’sdata. protect sensitive information. Reluctance to disclose details
AnanalysisoftherelevantpoliciesisdepictedinTable2. about cybersecurity policies and practices for fear of revealing
exploitable vulnerabilities is common, which caused a lack of
standardizedreportingforcybersecuritypolicymanagementuntil
3.2.3 UC17:accessinghealthdatafromafitness legal frameworks took effect. Despite these recent changes, a
tracker significant number of organizations struggle to understand and
AnorthopediccenterrecommendstheusageofGNSS-enabled implement guidelines for reporting. As the threat landscape
fitness trackers for improving the quality of patient diagnosis by is constantly changing, keeping cybersecurity policies and best
connectingtothecentre’sWiFiandserver.Ahacktivistreplicates practicesup-to-datecanbechallenging.
the centre’s WiFi SSID and subsequently launches a man-in- Manyorganizationsarealsosubjecttoregulatoryrequirements
the-middle attack, intercepting and manipulating patient data relatedtocybersecurity,whichcancreatechallengesinmanaging
transmitted to the server, as the used encryption was based on a policies and practices. A lack of awareness among stakeholders
known symmetric algorithm utilizing plain HTTP without TLS. about the importance of cybersecurity policy management
Thetampereddataregisteringonthecentre’srealnetworkserver and the risks associated with cyber-attacks can further create
raisesalarmsamongthemedicalstaff,thereforebindingadditional barriers to enhance organizational resilience. Addressing these
resources.Thisattackresultedintheviolationofconfidentialityand challenges through awareness trainings, dedicated resources, and
integrity of patient data impacting the centre’s quality of services enforced policies has a significant impact on an organization’s
and subsequently the patient’s private life, which consequently cybersecurity resilience and facilitates compliance with legal
erodedthecentre’scredibility.Ananalysisoftherelevantpolicies regulations(8,9).
isdepictedinTable3.
3.2.4 UC20:compomisedworkstationallowsthe 3.4 Sharing cybersecurity policy
scanningofhospitalnetwork management approaches in
Byopeninganattachmentofanemailcontainingatrojan,an interdependent organizations
employee causes the compromise of a hospital workstation by a
hacker, who establishes a backdoor to launch a network scanner.
Sharingcybersecuritypolicymanagementapproachesasaform
This allows the hacker to gather detailed information about the
of collaboration between interdependent organizations facilitates
hospital’sITassets,aswellasinformationaboutoperatingsystems,
understanding of risks and risk management, including the
browsers,andnetworkprotocolsinordertoexploitvulnerabilities
identificationofareasofconcern,aimingatestablishingacommon
andstrengthentheattacker’spresence.Thisaccesscansubsequently
baselineregardingpoliciesandpractices.Oneofthekeychallenges
beusedtoimpactIT-dependenthealthcareservicesorcompromise
toachievethisobjectiveliesintheheterogeneityoforganizations.
the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of patient data. An
Differences in organizational structures mean differences in risk
analysisoftherelevantpoliciesisdepictedinTable4.
strategiesandtolerances,whichinhibitthedevelopmentofshared
policiesandpractices.
Another aspect is defined through used infrastructure and
3.3 Cybersecurity policy management and
technology. Organizations relying on cloud services will have
transparency corresponding policies which differ from those organizations
utilizingon-premiseinfrastructure.Pairedwithdifferentpriorities
Oneofthekeychallengesincybersecuritypolicymanagement pertainingtoindividualsectors(e.g.,watersupplyvs.healthcare)
is balancing the need for transparency with the need to establishingacommonfocuscanbedifficult.
FrontiersinMedicine 07 frontiersin.org
LuidoldandJungbauer 10.3389/fmed.2024.1379852
TABLE2 AnalysisofpoliciesinUC24.
Policyarea Currentstate Recommended Policymanagement Expectedoutcome
policy action
Encryptionstandards WebRTCbugleakingthe MandatoryuseofWebRTC Regularsecurityauditsto Enhancedprivacyofpatient
customer’sIPaddress securityfeatures ensureWebRTCsecurity communication
Networkaccesscontrol Compromisedsignaling Restrictedaccesstosignaling Implementnetwork Preventionofunauthorized
server server monitoringandaccesslogs networkaccess
DeviceaAuthentication Lackofverificationofpeer Implementationofpeer Firmwareupdatetoenforce Reductionintheriskof
connection identityverification peeridentityverification man-in-the-middleattacks
Dataintegrity Lackofverificationofdata Implementationofdata Continuousmonitoringfor Assuranceofaccuratepatient
senttoEMR integritychecks dataanomalies EMRdata
TABLE3 AnalysisofpoliciesinUC17.
Policyarea Currentstate Recommended Policymanagement Expectedoutcome
policy action
Encryptionstandards Useofknownsymmetric MandatoryuseofTLSforall Regularsecurityauditsto Enhancedsecurityofpatient
encryptionwithoutTLS communications ensureTLSimplementation datatransmission
Networkaccesscontrol UnrestrictedWiFiaccess RestrictedWiFiaccesswith Implementnetwork Preventionofunauthorized
authentication monitoringandaccesslogs networkaccess
Deviceauthentication Fitnesstrackersconnectingto Devicesmustauthenticatethe Firmwareupdatetoenforce Reductionintheriskof
anynetworkSSID networkbeforeconnecting networkauthentication man-in-the-middleattacks
Dataintegrity Lackofverificationofdata Implementationofdata Continuousmonitoringfor Assuranceofaccuratepatient
senttoserver integritychecks dataanomalies healthdata
Patientprivacy Potentialforpatientdataand Strictaccesscontrolsfor Trainingstaffonprivacy Protectionofpatient’sprivate
locationaccess sensitivedata policiesandprocedures information
An additional challenge lies in regulations and legal involving individuals or groups being blamed for cybersecurity
constraints. A lack of trust constitutes the inhibiting incidents rather than focusing on addressing the root causes of
factor with regard to sharing cybersecurity policy the incident resulting in the creation of a hostile environment
management approaches, predominantly when it comes discouraging collaboration and information sharing, further
to sharing sensitive information. Organizations competing inhibitingeffortstoenhancecybersecurityresilience.Furthermore,
in the same industry might further exhibit reluctance effective cybersecurity policy management can be resource-
in sharing approaches presenting additional barriers intensive, requiring significant investments in technology,
forcollaboration. training, and personnel. Limited resources combined with issues
Addressing these challenges through established guidelines pertaining to ownership impede the allocation of responsibility
for sharing information and dedicated communication andaccountability.
channels facilitates the alignment of policies and practices. Due to the evolving cybersecurity threat landscape effective
Furthermore, trust can be built through regular communication cybersecurity policy management requires monitoring and
and collaboration activities supporting decision making maintenanceofpoliciesandpracticesincludingaspectsregarding
and enhancing cybersecurity resilience of participating responsibility and accountability. This is often triggered by
organizations(9,10) changes in compliance and regulatory requirements (e.g., NIS2)
affecting cybersecurity policies and practices, possibly creating
additional responsibilities and accountabilities pertaining to
3.5 Responsibility and accountability for policy management. Addressing these challenges through
cybersecurity policy management establishing clear ownership including a culture of collaboration
and information sharing, as well as allocating resources to
Cybersecurity policy management encompasses a significant cybersecurity and actively maintaining cybersecurity policies
amount regarding challenges related to responsibility and creates an important baseline for strengthening an organizations
accountability as it constitutes a shared responsibility involving cybersecurityposture.Legalcompliancesandregulationsprovide
multiplestakeholdersacrossanorganization.Oneofthechallenges goals for implementing clear processes for reporting and
is the lack of clear ownership for cybersecurity policies, which investigating cybersecurity incidents further inhibiting the effects
complicatesholdingindividualsorgroupsaccountableforbreaches of blame culture and facilitating the establishment of a resilient
or failures. Another challenge is the existence of blame culture cybersecurityculture(9,11).
FrontiersinMedicine 08 frontiersin.org
LuidoldandJungbauer 10.3389/fmed.2024.1379852
TABLE4 AnalysisofpoliciesinUC20.
Policyarea Currentstate Recommended Policymanagement Expectedoutcome
policy action
Emailsecurity Employeeopeninganemail Implementationofemail Regularsecuritytrainingand Preventionofmalware
containingaTrojan filteringandscanning awarenessforemployees infectionviaemail
Assetmanagement Lackofinformationaboutthe Implementationofasset Continuousmonitoringand Improvedvisibilityand
hospital’sITassets inventoryandclassification updatingofassetinformation controlofITassets
Dataprotection Potentialforpatientdata Implementationofdata Continuousmonitoringand Assuranceofpatientdata
access,modification,or encryption,backup,and reportingofdatabreaches confidentiality,integrity,and
disclosurebythehacker recovery availability
4 Use case • The Network Services Team jumps into action, conducting
an immediate audit of all associated network, email, web,
AUseCasebasedfromtheCS-AWARE-NEXTprojectisused andlocalservicescredentialslinkedtotheuser’saccount,as
toprovetheapplicabilityinareallifescenario.TheCasehandles well as personal data stored on the device. They lock down
the response to a stolen Laptop with VPN Access as shown in access and initiate a change of all passwords and security
Figure1.Thisusecaseillustratesthepracticalimplementationand protocolsasaprecautionarymeasure.Thedeviceinquestion
challengesofthecybersecuritystrategiesandframeworksdiscussed getscompletelydisabled.
inSection3.2.Byexploringareal-worldscenario,wehighlightthe • While the technical teams address the network and system
needforadaptableandrobustcybersecuritymeasurestoeffectively vulnerabilities,theuserisadvisedtochangetheircredentials
address emergingthreats, anddemonstrate thedirectapplication for personal services that may have been saved or accessed
of risk-conscious cybersecurity policy management in a dynamic throughthestolenlaptop,topreventfurtherpersonalrisks.
healthcareenvironment. • With security measures in place, monitoring is heightened
Scenario In the wake of increased remote work due to the to track any suspicious activity across the system services
COVID-19 pandemic, a laptop belonging to an employee has associatedwiththeuser’saccount.Theperiodofactivityfrom
beenreportedstolen.ThisdevicehasestablishedVPNcredentials, thelastknownlegitimatelogintothecurrenttimeisreviewed
providing potential unauthorized access to the organization’s toassessanyunauthorizedactionstaken.
securenetwork. • Inconjunctionwiththeinternalmonitoring,thevendorfrom
ActorsUser(employeefromwhomthelaptopwasstolen),IT whom the laptop was sourced is notified, and assistance is
SecurityTeam,DataProtectionOfficer(DPO),NetworkServices requestedintrackingthedevice,ifpossible,throughanybuilt-
Team,Police,Vendor(laptopprovider) in location services or tracking technologies that may have
PreconditionsTheemployeehasbeenworkingremotelydue beenpartofthelaptop’ssecurityfeatures.
topandemicrestrictionsandhasbeenusingaVPNtoaccessthe
company’s network. The laptop is equipped with the company’s OutcomeTheimmediateandcoordinatedresponseeffectively
standardsecurityfeatures,includingVPNaccess. mitigatestherisksassociatedwiththestolenlaptop.Thecompany’s
TriggerThetheftofthelaptopisreportedbytheusertotheIT actionspreventunauthorizedaccess,protectingsensitivedataand
SecurityTeam. maintaining compliance with cybersecurity policies. The user is
Narrative madeawareofthestepstakenandiseducatedontheimportanceof
securingpersonalandprofessionaldata.Allpartiesremainvigilant,
• Upon receiving the report of the stolen laptop, the IT readytorespondtoanysubsequentactivitiesrelatedtotheincident.
Security Team initiates an interview with the user to gather Postconditions The IT Security Team, along with the DPO,
comprehensive information about the incident and the reviewstheincidenttoupdateandrefinetheorganization’ssecurity
potentialdataatrisk.TheteamworksswiftlytocleartheVPN protocolsandtraining,withtheaimofpreventingsimilarbreaches
credentials associated with the stolen device to prevent any inthefuture.Additionally,afollow-upwithlawenforcementand
unauthorizedaccesstothenetwork. thevendorismaintainedtotracktheprogressontherecoveryof
• Simultaneously, the Data Protection Officer is informed of thestolenproperty.
the breach, and instructions are taken to comply with data
protectionlawsandregulations.TheDPOinitiatestheprocess
oflegalandnotificationobligations,includingcommunication 5 Key requirements specification for
withlawenforcement.
cybersecurity policy management
• Simultaneously, before it is known which data could be
accessed through the device, the local authorities, banks,
A successful cybersecurity policy management framework
the CSIRTs and internal affairs need to be informed.
includes a range of vital components, including risk assessment,
The DPO is contacted regarding legal guidelines,
policy development and enforcement, collaboration and
as well as the manager and the national application/
information sharing, and effective decision-making processes.
internetprovider.
Furthermore,itrequirestheinvolvementofinternalandexternal
FrontiersinMedicine 09 frontiersin.org
LuidoldandJungbauer 10.3389/fmed.2024.1379852
FIGURE1
Originalscenariofromtheworkshop:stolenITproperty.
stakeholders, with the latter encompassing government agencies, • Promotionofcollaborationandawarenessraising:Buildon
aswellasotherorganizations. theCOLTRANEapproachforpromotingcollaborativepolicy
Adding to the general components, individual requirements managementandawarenessraising.
from organizations need to be taken into account to ensure • Simulationandtraining:Useavirtualplatformtosimulate
a limited degree of restrictions and facilitate the adoption thehandlingofattacksituations.Providehands-onexperience
of a cybersecurity policy management framework. The main ofcollaboration-andawareness-drivenpolicymanagement.
requirement categories obtained from the end-user workshops • Organizational prerequisites for acting on the
wereexaminedandsubsetsofrequirementsweredefined. ecosystem level: in order to handle policies at
the ecosystem level organizations need to provide
the necessary basis. The steps toward it have to
5.1 Basic knowledge and understanding of
beidentified.
formalized policies
“Facilitate the understanding of documented formal policies
and their advantages.” This meta-requirement focuses on raising 5.2 Formalization of best practices
awarenessofstakeholdersthroughtraining.Theinvolvedapproach
(12) is based on the Erasmus+ project COLTRANE. The sub- “The ability to create documentation of best practices &
requirementsderivedfromthismeta-requirementarelistedbelow: guidelinesintheorganizationtoretainexpertiseandpreventloss
ofknowledge.”Thismeta-requirementfocusesonthecollaborative
• Raiseawarenessofcurrentpolicies:Improvedissemination approach involving employees, organizations, communities, and
ofpoliciesfrompurepublishingtoawareness,understanding government agencies in order to enhance an organization’s
andenforcement. resilience. In order to implement effective formalization of best
FrontiersinMedicine 10 frontiersin.org
LuidoldandJungbauer 10.3389/fmed.2024.1379852
practices,thecybersecuritypolicymanagementcomponentworks • Provide a basis for decision making: Building on decision
inconcertwiththecollaborationcomponentinWP2.Anoverview making and reflective learning models in support of policy
islistedbelow: enforcementandmaintenance.
• Definitionofstateoftheartpractices:Facilitatethecreation
andmaintenanceofpracticesdependingoncurrentsituations.
5.5 Ensure effective visualization
• Effective applicability and adaptability: Ensure practices are
case-typebasedtoprovideabestfitforspecificenvironments.
“Create a visualization supporting the implemented
functionalities in an intuitive way.” In order to stimulate an
active engagement with the cybersecurity policy management
5.3 Shared policy repository
component,theuserinterfaceanduserexperienceneedtoappeal
totheenduser’spreferences.
“Enable information sharing through a shared repository.”
This meta-requirement regarding the provision and usage of
a shared knowledge base regarding CTI, reports, as well as 6 Conclusion
information pertaining to legal compliance. In order to realize
therequirementsofasharedpolicyrepositoryanditssubsequent
Theneedtoadaptcybersecuritymanagementpoliciesquickly
usageacybersecuritypolicymanagementcomponentdemandsthe
and dynamically (e.g., relating to risk management and business
support of AI-based quality data assessment and correlation. An
continuity,incidentmanagement)tokeepupwiththecontinuously
overviewislistedbelow:
changing threat and attack landscape requires a new and more
dynamicapproachtopolicydefinitionandconstantre-evaluation
• Harmonization with governing bodies: Ensure effective
againsttherequirementsdefinedbythecybersecurityrealities,as
collaboration with governing bodies through establishing a
isreportedbythreatintelligenceprovidedby,e.g.,NIScompetent
commonstandardforinformationsharing.
authorities/CSIRTsorthreatintelligencecommunities.
• Provision of information: Make related documents from
Oneoftheaspectsofcollaborationwithinasharedecosystem
communities and governing bodies available for improving
lies in the development of common policies and standards in
legalandtechnicalreadiness.
order to diminish the complexity regarding the management of
• Filter information according to needs: Enable means of
cybersecurity risks and ensuring actions taken are streamlined
distinctionbetweenpoliciesaccordingtometadata.
according to the same security protocols. Additionally, the
• Highlight current threats and vulnerabilities: Point out
implementation of common policies and standards helps to
trending topics within the organization, community, and
build trust between interdependent organizations and their
governingbodies.AnalyzesharedenrichedCTI.
customers,furtherincreasingtherelevanceofeffectiverisk-aware
cybersecuritypolicymanagement.
The main focus regarding policy management at an
5.4 Implementation of best practices into
organizationallevelliesinthedevelopmentandimplementationof
workflows policiesasguidelinespertainingtotheorganization’scybersecurity
processes and practices in order to ensure compliance. Main
“Enable the adaption of policies and best practices to the subjects include but are not limited to risks regarding the
needsoftheorganizationandtheirsubsequentadoptionintothe supply chain and third-party risk management, and involve a
organizational context.” This meta-requirement focuses on the given degree of collaboration concerning the development and
adoption of policies into automatic workflows regarding disaster implementationofpoliciesandpractices.Managingcybersecurity
recovery and business continuity plans, therefore enhancing policies in interdependent local and regional organizations can
resilienceandsupportinglegalcompliance.Inordertoeffectively present unique challenges due to the complex relationships and
implement best practices into organizational workflows the dependencies that exist between these organizations. Local and
cybersecuritypolicymanagementcomponentneedstoencompass regional organizations may be subject to different regulatory
functionality pertaining to business continuity and disaster and compliance requirements, which can make it challenging to
recovery.Anoverviewislistedbelow: establishacommonsetofcybersecuritypoliciesandpractices.
Sharing cybersecurity policy management approaches in
• Provision of core essentials: Ensure the basic needs of an interdependentorganizationshastokeepinmindthedifferences
organization are met for legal compliance with governing in organizational structure, which can make it challenging
bodies. to align cybersecurity policies and practices across different
• Policy management life cycle: Provide an environment for organizations. Sharing these sensitive cybersecurity policy
creating,managing,enforcingandmaintainingpolicies. management approaches requires a high degree of trust between
• Adaptionofdisasterrecoveryandbusinesscontinuityplans: organizations, which can be difficult to establish and maintain.
Facilitate the integration of policies and best practices into Ultimately,asharedapproachtocybersecuritypolicymanagement
disasterrecoveryandbusinesscontinuityprocedures.Enable canhelptoimprovetheoverallsecuritypostureofinterdependent
continuousmonitoringandadaptionofrelatedworkflows. organizationsandreducetheriskofcyberattacks.
FrontiersinMedicine 11 frontiersin.org
LuidoldandJungbauer 10.3389/fmed.2024.1379852
Ongoing research focuses on support for compliance with Acknowledgments
regulatorybodiesandauthorities,aswellasautonomousadaption
toorganizationaleventsbasedonlogdata.Thisapproachfocuses The authors would like to thank our partners
on the use of the double-loop learning model to change minor from 5th Regional Health Authority of Thessaly
policydetailsautomatically,orprovidedecisionmakingsupportfor and Sterea for participating in workshops and
more substantial changes. Additional focus lies in addressing the additionaldiscussions.
developmentofsecurityandprivacyrelatedpoliciesforIoTdevices
in healthcare. Frameworks targeting compliance with security
standardsbeforedeploymentserveanincreaseddemandinlightof Conflict of interest
legislativeplansforfosteringdataexchange,collaboration,aswell
assupplychainsecurity. The authors declare that the research was conducted
in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships
Author contributions that could be construed as a potential conflict
ofinterest.
CL: Writing—original draft, Writing—review & editing. CJ:
Writing—originaldraft,Writing—review&editing.
Publisher’s note
Funding All claims expressed in this article are solely those
of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of
Theauthor(s)declarethatfinancialsupportwasreceivedforthe their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher,
research,authorship,and/orpublicationofthisarticle.Thisproject the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be
hasreceivedfundingfromtheEuropeanUnion’sHorizonEurope evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by
research and innovation programme under grant agreement no its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the
101069543. publisher.
References
1.Manso M. Use Cases Definition and Pilot Overview Document v3. (2021). 6.Boyd J. Destruction and Creation. (1976). Available online at:
Available online at: https://zenodo.org/records/5052727 (accessed December https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Destruction-and-Creation-Boyd/
7,2023). 483359fa9420efcddde5a17da597f462c2a788c2(accessedDecember15,2023).
2.SchaberreiterT,WieserC,KoumpisA,LuidoldC,AndriessenJ,CappielloC,et 7.ZagerR,ZagerJ.OODAloopsincyberspace:anewcyber-defensemodel.Small
al.Addressingcriticalissuesandchallengesfordynamiccybersecuritymanagement WarsJ.(2017).Availableonlineat:https://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/ooda-loops-
inorganisationsandlocal/regionalnetworks:theCS-AWARE-NEXTproject.In:2023 cyberspace-new-cyberdefense-model
FifthInternationalConferenceonTransdisciplinaryAI(TransAI).(2023).p.232–236.
8.Bayuk JL. Cyber security policy catalog. In: Cyber Security Policy Guidebook.
Availableonlineat:https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/10387599(accessed
Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. (2012). p. 93-210. Available online at: https://
January9,2024).
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9781118241530.ch6(accessedDecember19,
3.Luidold C, Schaberreiter T, Wieser C, Koumpis A, Cappiello C, 2023).
Citro T, et al. Increasing cybersecurity awareness and collaboration in
9.Shaver KG. The Attribution of Blame: Causality, Responsibility, and
organisations and local / regional networks: the CS-AWARE-NEXT project.
Blameworthiness.Berlin:SpringerScience&BusinessMedia.(2012).
In: Sustainable, Secure, and Smart Collaboration (S3C) Workshop 2023. (2023).
Available online at: http://eprints.cs.univie.ac.at/7835/ (accessed December 10.PalaA,ZhuangJ.Informationsharingincybersecurity:areview.DeciAnaly.
19,2023). (2019)16:157–237.doi:10.1287/deca.2018.0387
4.Argyris C. Double-loop learning and implementable validity. In: Tsoukas 11.PolliniA,CallariTC,TedeschiA,RuscioD,SaveL,ChiarugiF,etal.Leveraging
H, Mylonopoulos N, editors. Organizations as Knowledge Systems: Knowledge, humanfactorsincybersecurity:anintegratedmethodologicalapproach.CognTechnol
Learning and Dynamic Capabilities. London: Palgrave Macmillan UK (2004). Work.(2022)24:371–90.doi:10.1007/s10111-021-00683-y
p.29–45.
12.LangnerG,AndriessenJ,QuirchmayrG,FurnellS,ScaranoV,TokolaTJ.Poster:
5.LendersV,TannerA,BlarerA.Gaininganedgeincyberspacewithadvanced the need for a collaborative approach to cyber security education. In: 2021 IEEE
situational awareness. IEEE Secur. Privacy. (2015) 13:65–74. doi: 10.1109/MSP. EuropeanSymposiumonSecurityandPrivacy(EuroS&P).Vienna(2021).p.719–721.
2015.30 doi:10.1109/EuroSP51992.2021.00058
FrontiersinMedicine 12 frontiersin.org