JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
Classifying Residual Stroke Severity using Robotics-
Assisted Stroke Rehabilitation: A Machine Learning
Approach
Russell Jeter, Raymond Greenfield, Stephen N. Housley, Igor Belykh
Submitted to: JMIR Biomedical Engineering
on: February 01, 2024
Disclaimer: © The authors. All rights reserved. This is a privileged document currently under peer-review/community
review. Authors have provided JMIR Publications with an exclusive license to publish this preprint on it's website for
review purposes only. While the final peer-reviewed paper may be licensed under a CC BY license on publication, at this
stage authors and publisher expressively prohibit redistribution of this draft paper other than for review purposes.
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
Table of Contents
Original Manuscript. ...................................................................................................................................................................... 5
Supplementary Files ..................................................................................................................................................................... 22
Figures ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 23
Figure 1. ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 24
Figure 2. ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 25
Figure 3. ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 26
Figure 4. ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 27
Figure 5. ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 28
Figure 6. ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 29
Figure 7. ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 30
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
Classifying Residual Stroke Severity using Robotics-Assisted Stroke
Rehabilitation: A Machine Learning Approach
Russell Jeter1* PhD; Raymond Greenfield2* MSci; Stephen N. Housley1, 3 PhD, DPT, PT; Igor Belykh2, 4 Prof Dr
1Motus Nova, LLC Atlanta US
2Department of Mathematics and Statistics Georgia State University Atlanta US
3Laboratory for Sensorimotor Integration Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta US
4Neuroscience Institute Georgia State University Atlanta US
*these authors contributed equally
Corresponding Author:
Igor Belykh Prof Dr
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 4110
Atlanta
US
Abstract
Background: Stroke therapy is essential to reduce impairments and improve motor movements by engaging autogenous
neuroplasticity. Utilizing machine learning and therapy session kinematic measurements promises to have a central role in
rehabilitation decision-making in determining if patient therapy is improving.
Objective: This study uses supervised learning methods to address a clinician’s autonomous classification of stroke residual
severity labeled data towards improving in-home robotics-assisted stroke rehabilitation.
Methods: Thirty-three stroke patients participate in in-home therapy sessions using the Motus Nova robotics rehabilitation
technology to capture upper and lower body motion. The therapy session summary data is based on high-resolution movement
and assistance data and clinician-informed discrete stroke residual severity labels. This arises from a final processed dataset of
32,902 patient sessions based on the maximum score per patient per session. Four machine learning algorithms are used to
classify stroke residual severity: light gradient boosting, extra trees, deep neural networks, and classical logistic regression. Their
performance measures are evaluated to identify which method maximizes stroke residual severity classification accuracy.
Results: We demonstrate that the light gradient boosting method provides the most reliable autonomous detection of stroke
severity.
Conclusions: We show how objectively measured rehabilitation training paired with machine learning methods can be used to
identify the residual stroke severity class with efforts to enhance in-home self-guided, individualized stroke rehabilitation. As
data from rehabilitation practices are often of comparable size and nature to the data collected in our study, this suggests that the
light gradient boosting method should be considered a standard, more efficient tool for this analysis.
(JMIR Preprints 01/02/2024:56980)
DOI: https://doi.org/10.2196/preprints.56980
Preprint Settings
1) Would you like to publish your submitted manuscript as preprint?
Please make my preprint PDF available to anyone at any time (recommended).
Please make my preprint PDF available only to logged-in users; I understand that my title and abstract will remain visible to all users.
Only make the preprint title and abstract visible.
No, I do not wish to publish my submitted manuscript as a preprint.
2) If accepted for publication in a JMIR journal, would you like the PDF to be visible to the public?
Yes, please make my accepted manuscript PDF available to anyone at any time (Recommended).
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
Yes, but please make my accepted manuscript PDF available only to logged-in users; I understand that the title and abstract will remain visible to all users (see Important note, above). I also understand that if I later pay to participate in <a href="https://jmir.zendesk.com/hc/en-us/articles/360008899632-What-is-the-PubMed-Now-ahead-of-print-option-when-I-pay-the-APF-" target="_blank">JMIR’s PubMed Now! service</a> service, my accepted manuscript PDF will automatically be made openly available.
Yes, but only make the title and abstract visible (see Important note, above). I understand that if I later pay to participate in <a href="https://jmir.zendesk.com/hc/en-us/articles/360008899632-What-is-the-PubMed-Now-ahead-of-print-option-when-I-pay-the-APF-" target="_blank">JMIR’s PubMed Now! service</a> service, my accepted manuscript PDF will automatically be made openly available.
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
Original Manuscript
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
Classifying Residual Stroke Severity using Robotics-Assisted
Stroke Rehabilitation: A Machine Learning Approach
Russell Jetera,b,†, Raymond Greenfielda,† Stephen N. Housleyb,c, and Igor Belykha,d,*
a Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Georgia State University, P.O. Box 4110, Atlanta, Georgia, 30302-410, USA
b Motus Nova, LLC, Atlanta, Georgia, 30341, USA
c School of Biological Sciences, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, 30332, USA
d Neuroscience Institute, Georgia State University, P.O. Box 4110, Atlanta, Georgia, 30302-410, USA
†
These authors contributed equally to this work
* Corresponding author: ibelykh@gsu.edu
ABSTRACT
Background: Stroke therapy is essential to reduce impairments and improve motor movements by
engaging autogenous neuroplasticity. Stroke therapy is essential to reduce impairments and improve
motor movements by engaging autogenous neuroplasticity. Traditionally, stroke rehabilitation occurs in
inpatient and outpatient rehabilitation facilities. However, recent literature increasingly explores moving
the recovery process into the home and integrating technology-based interventions. This study advances
this goal by promoting in-home, autonomous stroke patient recovery through robotics-assisted
rehabilitation and classifying stroke residual severity using machine learning methods.
Objective: Our main objective is to use kinematics data collected during in-home, self-guided therapy
sessions to develop supervised machine-learning methods to address a clinician’s autonomous
classification of stroke residual severity labeled data towards improving in-home robotics-assisted
stroke rehabilitation.
Methods: Thirty-three stroke patients participate in in-home therapy sessions using the Motus Nova
robotics rehabilitation technology to capture upper and lower body motion. During each therapy
session, the Motus Hand and Foot collect movement data, assistance data, and activity-specific data. We
then synthesized, processed, and summarized these data. Next, we pair the therapy session data with
clinician-informed, discrete stroke residual severity labels: “No Range of Motion,” “Low Range of
Motion,” and “High Range of Motion.” Afterwards, we perform an 80%/20% split to divide the dataset
into a training set and holdout test set. We use four machine learning algorithms to classify stroke
residual severity: light gradient boosting, extra trees, deep neural networks, and classical logistic
regression. We select models based on 10-fold cross-validation and measure their performance
measures are evaluated on a holdout test dataset using F1-score to identify which model maximizes
stroke residual severity classification accuracy.
Results: We demonstrated that the light gradient boosting method provides the most reliable
autonomous detection of stroke severity. The trained model is a consensus model that consists of 139
decision trees with up to 115 leaves each. This light gradient boosting model boasts a 96.7% F1-score
compared to logistic regression (55.8%), extra trees (94.8%), and a deep feed-forward neural network
(70.1%).
Conclusion: We showed how objectively measured rehabilitation training paired with machine learning
methods can be used to identify the residual stroke severity class with efforts to enhance in-home self-
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
guided, individualized stroke rehabilitation. The model we trained relies only on session summary
statistics, meaning it can potentially be integrated into similar settings for real-time classification,
such as outpatient rehabilitation facilities.
Keywords: Stroke; Rehabilitation Robotics; Machine Learning; Artificial Intelligence; Physical
Therapy; Neuroplasticity
Introduction
Stroke is a leading cause of mortality and disability worldwide, and the economic costs of treatment
and post-stroke care are substantial [1]. In 2019, there were 12.2 million incident cases of stroke, 101
million prevalent stroke cases, and 6.55 million deaths from stroke [2]. The severity of a stroke can
range from mild to severe, with severe strokes often leading to long-term disability or even death.
Stroke rehabilitation typically involves a team of healthcare professionals, including doctors, nurses,
therapists, and other specialists. The specific goals and interventions of stroke rehabilitation vary
depending on the individual’s needs and abilities. They may include physical therapy to improve
mobility, occupational therapy to improve the ability to perform daily activities, speech therapy to
improve communication skills, and cognitive therapy to improve memory, problem-solving, and
other cognitive abilities. While traditionally recovery has taken place in inpatient and outpatient
rehabilitation facilities, there is growing recent literature about moving the recovery process into the
home [3, 4] and to integrate technology-based interventions [5] This study takes steps to make this
goal of stroke patient recovery in-home and autonomous via robotics-assisted stroke rehabilitation
and classifying stroke residual severity via machine learning methods.
Machine learning in healthcare and stroke rehabilitation is not a new concept (see [6-9] as notable
examples of this vast research field and [10] for a systematic review of machine learning methods for
post-stroke rehabilitation recovery prediction). In particular, multiple studies have been performed to
predict outcomes in patient survival, locoregional recurrences, and long-term outcomes in ischemic
stroke patients [11-15]. Similarly, studies focused on motor function have leveraged retrospective
healthcare data and targeted predicting the short- and long-term functional ability [16-18]. Such
studies represent an exciting step forward in stroke rehabilitation but have some limitations. These
limitations include the use of healthcare data that is infrequently measured (sometimes entirely
limited to admission data), which can hamper the performance of models that rely on large datasets
for generalizability. Similarly, most studies limit their scope to predicting short- and long-term
outcomes and may fail to capture some of the day-to-day changes stroke survivors experience.
This study aims to overcome these limitations by quantifying the progress of patient improvement
via in-home therapy sessions using the Motus Nova robotics rehabilitation technology [19] that
captures upper and lower body motion. The Motus Hand and Motus Foot are robotic therapeutic
devices designed to be used by stroke survivors with residual upper and lower extremity impairments
at home without needing help from a clinician or caregiver. The Motus Hand and Foot are rooted in
the results from constraint-induced movement therapy studies [20, 21], and focus on getting stroke
survivors high volumes of repetitive task practice. The Motus Hand and Motus Foot engage the
affected wrist or ankle of the user, guiding them through various therapeutic exercises targeting
various functional tasks (e.g., gross motor control, fine motor control, and precision tracking). Earlier
versions of the technology have been shown to have clinically significant improvements in
depressive symptoms, functional independence, upper extremity use in functional tasks, distance
walking, and gait speed [19, 22, 23].
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
Traditionally, to determine stroke survivor functional ability, a stroke survivor will be assessed by a
clinician during often infrequent clinical visits (whether through an outpatient rehabilitation facility,
visiting a neurologist, or a primary care physician). The time-scale of these assessments fails to
capture the progress made during the recovery process when it happens. Utilizing machine learning
and therapy session kinematic measurements promises to have a central role in rehabilitation
decision-making in determining if patient therapy is improving. Machine learning is the
methodology that allows computers to learn from experience. By constructing and training
supervised classifiers to learn decision rules from data, automatic solutions can be exploited to make
predictions on new data [24, 25]. Like in many healthcare, disease, or machine learning research
applied in a clinical setting, labeling of patient data by a clinician is necessary [6]. This study applies
the same heuristic methodologies. Our goal is to use kinematics data collected during in-home, self-
guided therapy sessions to construct supervised machine learning methods to address autonomous
classification of stroke residual severity labeled data towards improving in-home robotics-assisted
individualized stroke rehabilitation.
Methods
Study Design
The Motus Hand and the Motus Foot each consist of two major components: a peripheral (see the
bottom panel of (Figure 1) for a close-up of the Motus Hand peripheral) that the patient attaches to
their affected limb and an interactive console that guides their therapy routine and assessment using
a video game interface. The peripherals have a pneumatic actuator that can dynamically provide
assistance/resistance by filling an air muscle in the peripheral that moves the wrist/ankle joint. The
wrist/ankle joint of the peripheral has an embedded angle and pressure sensor that transmits live
angle and pressure data to the console. This allows the console to give the user immediate visual
feedback of their movement through avatars in a video game on the screen. The therapeutic video
game activities can provide a dynamic feedback loop consisting of in-game goals (ships to shoot or
coins to collect, for example) that drive user movements, which correspond to movement on-screen,
which allow the console to react and set new goals/obstacles. This feedback loop is designed to
promote sensory-motor function.
A therapy session with the Motus Hand or Foot consists of stretching, gross motor control, fine
motor control, and endurance exercises, depending on the patient’s needs. This process is depicted in
(Figure 1) where a Motus Hand user is playing “Cosmic Tennis,” a gross motor control exercise that
plays like the classic arcade game Pong [26]. The user’s wrist/ankle movement corresponds to the
movement of the paddle on the right-hand side of the screen, and the goal is to hit the ball back and
forth to score on the Artificial Intelligence (AI)–controlled opponent. Because of the user-guided
nature of a therapy session with the Motus Hand and Foot, therapy sessions can vary greatly in
length. In the data collected, therapy sessions range from 5 to 60 minutes, and between 1 and 10
therapeutic activities.
The Motus Hand and Foot collect high-resolution angle and pressure data from sensors embedded in
the wrist/ankle joints and the pressure management system. This high-resolution data is collected at a
frequency of 30 Hz, and stored in a time series database. Other information collected during a
therapy session includes score, peripheral type (Motus Hand or Motus Foot), current game
(therapeutic activity), etc. This study used anonymous data collected from 33 stroke patients. In total,
those patients performed 32,902 therapeutic activities (that is, each unique activity performed in each
therapy session). This therapy session data is then divided using an 80%/20% into a training data set
and a holdout test set. The training set is used for training the classification models, and the test set is
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
reserved for the final model evaluation.
To use the data collected during a therapy session to classify a patient’s stroke residual severity
autonomously, each patient was given a guided assessment with a clinician using the Motus Hand or
Foot to classify them as having a High Range of Motion (ROM), Low ROM, or No ROM. These
classification levels are intentionally chosen to be coarse to mimic the environment in a
rehabilitation therapy session.
To find an ideal classifier, we use to consider the training and performance of four machine learning
algorithms: a light gradient boosting [27], extra trees classifier [28], deep neural network [29], and
multi-class logistic regression [30]. A practical model is then constructed using the most common
data measured in each session based on the maximum score per session per patient. Unsupervised
learning methods are then applied to the training dataset, such as the correlation matrix and principal
component analysis, to show that all variables collected are relevant to the study. After performing
dimensionality reduction analysis, the models are selected using 10-fold cross-validation on the
training dataset with the mean and standard deviation of accuracy from each computational
experiment. Afterwards, the following metrics determine the model’s performance, including the
accuracy, precision, and recall from the confusion matrix. The macro average F1-score was used to
judge the efficacy of the models, as this is a multi-classification problem [31], and as such, accuracy
would be an insufficient measure. (Figure 2) provides a high-level overview of the data collection,
analysis, processing, and modeling that ultimately produces the final classification results.
Details of Data Collection
Throughout a therapy session using the Motus Hand or Motus Foot, live angle data (measured in
degrees from a natural midpoint in wrist/ankle placement) is collected from the sensor embedded in
the wrist or ankle joint at 30 readings per second. This “raw” angle sensor data is then stored in a
time series database (InfluxDB [32]). In addition to the high-resolution angle data, pressure readings
(measured in PSI) are taken from the pressure management system at 30 measurements per second.
While these readings are not high resolution compared to state-of-the-art kinematics technology [33],
it is significantly higher resolution than what a typical physician would have access to during
assessments in a normal physical therapy visit.
Each therapy session for a patient includes a selection of about 30 activities that focus on several
types of motor function, including gross motor control, fine motor control, flexor tone reduction,
endurance, reaction time, and tracking. A patient can participate in more than one video game
(therapeutic activity) during a patient session. The score is recorded and stored once the patient
completes the video game. The scores for each game are not necessarily standardized. This means a
score of 100 in one game can represent a dramatically different performance than a score of 100 in
another. The score is collected each time a player performs an action in the game that would increase
or decrease the score, so this field is collected more irregularly and infrequently than angle and
pressure data. Gender and other biometric data such as age, height, and weight are not included in
the patient description or the analysis.
Clinician Labeling
To train a classifier for determining stroke residual severity, our dataset must have appropriate labels
corresponding to the patient’s level of function around the time the data was collected. During a
series of video calls and using the Motus Hand and Foot technology, a clinician met with each stroke
survivor and performed a series of assessments. Remote assessment of extremity function using an
external device has been studied, and indicates that it is non-inferior to in-person assessment when
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
done properly [34]. The clinician used the potentiometer [35] embedded in the wrist/ankle joint of
the Motus Hand/Foot and a “clinician dashboard” interface to read live angle and pressure data from
the patient and provide them the requisite assistance to stretch the patient’s wrist or ankle to collect
passive and active range of motion thresholds. With these assessments, the clinician estimated each
individual’s active range of motion, passive range of motion, and characterized their level of
function as “No Range of Motion,” “Low Range of Motion,” or “High Range of Motion.” While
these labels are quite broad, the labeling process is hardly a simple algorithm. At the clinician’s
discretion, quantitative and qualitative factors must apply an appropriate label. In particular, the
clinician recorded the minimum/maximum angle reached for the assessment performed, the type of
assessment performed, and a label summarizing the patient’s ROM level. This data is summarized in
(Table 1).
Table 1. Example patient label table assessed by a clinician during telehealth session.
ID Maximum Minimum Assessment Clinician
Angle Angle Classification
1495 37 -20 Passive No
2273 21 -16 Passive No
2085 40 -15 Passive No
2098 44 -9 Passive No
1864 28 -12 Passive No
2040 37 -18 Passive No
2097 43 -18 Passive Low
2356 -3 -17 Assisted Low
2356 -3 -17 Assisted Low
1688 52 -23 Assisted Low
1876 54 -12 Passive Low
2029 46 -20 Passive Low
1458 30 -18 Passive Low
1637 10 -12 Assisted High
2282 8 -16 Assisted High
1781 39 -15 Assisted High
2360 10 -18 Assisted High
All patients first were given a passive range of motion assessment, in which they were stretched as
far as their wrist/ankle would allow without experiencing pain or discomfort. Next, an active range
of motion assessment was conducted. In this assessment, the patient bends their wrist/ankle as far up
and down as they can without any assistance from the Motus Hand/Foot, and without compensating
with other parts of their bodies (hips, shoulders, etc.). Depending on the patient’s assessed active
range of motion, an assisted range of motion assessment was performed. This assessment consists of
providing patients with varying amounts of assistance and recording their range of motion in the
presence of an upward force.
We define a patient as “Assisted” or “Passive” based on the most arduous assessment performed on
the patient. The low ROM label contains a combination of patients that either did or did not have
enough movement for the assisted range of motion assessment. Notice that all patients who are
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
classified with a high ROM (low residual stroke severity) were able to complete the assisted range of
motion assessment. This is important when noticing that patients with ID 2085 and 1781 (blue) have
a similar total range of motion (Maximum angle – Minimum angle), but patient ID 1781 requires
clinician assistance to reach their maximum ROM. However, there is ambiguity in some labels. For
example, take patient ID 2356 (red), where it can be argued that the patient should have a high stroke
residual severity (corresponding to low/no ROM) given the low total range of motion with the
assistance. This is where the clinician has other outside factors that contribute to the final labeled
classification of a patient. The clinician is visually able to assess the level of tone and spasticity that
a patient may be exhibiting, which would not necessarily be captured in the minimum and maximum
range of motion values.
The assessment results and labels were reviewed and confirmed by an additional expert.
Data Processing
To create a more manageable dataset for the labeling task, we generate summary statistics of the
high-resolution data for each activity performed during a therapy session. First, to compensate for
sensor reading issues, we smooth outliers out of the raw time series data (replacing data points in the
99th and 1st percentile with the value of the 99th and 1st percentile, respectively). Then, summarize the
angle (relative to a reference midpoint in degrees) and pressure (in PSI) using the following
variables: R , the minimum ROM for a game; R , the maximum ROM for a game; R , the mean
min max mean
ROM for a game; P , the minimum pressure for a game; F , the maximum centripetal force
min flex
generated while moving downward (flexion for upper extremities, plantarflexion for lower
extremities); F , the maximum centripetal force generated while moving upward (extension for
ext
upper extremities, dorsiflexion for lower extremities), P , the maximum pressure for a game; P ,
max mean
the mean pressure for a game. We finally pair these game-level summary statistics with the number
of movements performed in the game (N ), the maximum score in the game (Score), and the total
mov
time spent playing that game during a therapy session (t ).
game
This transformation from high-resolution data to game-level summary statistics provides a much
more manageable dataset to which we can apply the clinician labels. A low ROM patient (as labeled
by the clinician) has little ROM during each game throughout a session. Using this idea, we
construct a new dataset from each activity (game) a patient takes part in during a session, with each
row having a unique (patient ID, session ID, game ID) tuple. It is worth noting that a patient is
unlikely to take part in every activity over the course of a therapy session; often, they gravitated to a
few choice activities during each session. A summary of the data in each row in the described dataset
is presented in (Table 2).
Table 2. Session Game Data Dictionary
Variable Description Role Unit Example
Fflex Maximum centripetal force generated moving in Feature Newton -3.047709105
the downward direction during an activity s
(computed from derivatives of angle data)
Fext Maximum centripetal force generated moving in Feature Newton 3.251405759
the upward direction during an activity s
(computed from derivatives of angle data)
Nmov The number of completed movements during an Feature integer 10
activity
Rmin Absolute minimum angle detected by angle Feature degrees -25
sensor during an activity
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
Rmax Absolute maximum angle detected during an Feature degrees 46.41941
activity
tgame Total time spent performing therapy during an Feature seconds 15
activity
Pmin Minimum Pressure applied by the sensor during Feature PSI -0.04511994
an activity
Pmax Maximum pressure applied by the sensor during Feature PSI 10.30989
an activity
Pmean Average pressure applied by the sensor during an Feature PSI 3.590553432
activity
Score Maximum score achieved during an activity Feature integer 100
h Peripheral type variable indicating the Hand or Feature 0, 1 Hand
Foot
Class Designate stroke severity label by a clinician Label 0, 1, 2 High
(High, Low, No)
g Unique identifier for each game (therapeutic Not Used integer 4
activity) that is available on the Motus
Hand/Foot
p Anonymous identifier for each patient using the Not Used integer 11
Motus Hand/Foot in this study
s Unique identifier for each session performed on Not Used integer 782302348734
the Motus Hand/Foot
After combining the data into this standardized dataset, the data then requires sanitization, analysis,
and normalization. The “Role” column indicates whether a variable is part of the feature set, the
labels, or not used in the model training at all. To sanitize the data, we fill in missing values, correct
invalid sensor values, and throw out data that did not represent a meaningful therapeutic exercise.
To isolate games with insufficient activity to draw meaningful conclusions, we restrict the number of
movements, N , performed during a game (therapeutic activity). A “movement” is any change of
mov
direction recorded in the angle sensor after noise is smoothed out of the time series. We remove any
game (therapeutic activity) with fewer than three movements, as no significant therapeutic exercise
can be performed with fewer than three movements (under assistance from the robotic Motus Hand/
Foot).
Before performing any data analysis, the harmonized dataset is partitioned using an 80%/20% split
into a training set and a holdout test set. The training set is used for exploratory data analysis and
model training. All normalization and transformation techniques derived from the training set are
then applied to the test set before the final predictive measures are computed. This is done to prevent
data leakage from including the test set in the derivation of normalization and transformation
techniques. The test dataset is reserved for the final performance measures in the Results section.
Exploratory Data Analysis
Data Distribution
It is well-known that proper data normalization is critical for maximizing model performance across
machine learning applications and methods [36]. Knowing the proper normalization technique for
each feature requires a cursory dataset analysis. In (Figure 3), we show representative distributions
of the features that will be input variables for our comparative model analysis. While some variables
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
are not normally distributed, assuming the data is normally distributed is sufficient considering the
results [37].
Correlation
We analyze the correlation among the features in our dataset to identify potential redundancies.
Then, we look at the principal component decomposition [38] to see if the variation in the data can
be meaningfully reduced to a lower dimensional space. The correlation matrix for the feature set,
constructed by computing the correlation between each pair of features in the dataset, is shown in
(Figure 4).
Because a correlation matrix points to potential relationships between features, it can indicate the
feasibility of dimensionality reduction when preparing a dataset for building a classifier. If two
variables are highly correlated, i.e., |Cor(X, Y)| > 0.9, the authors in [39] suggest that one of those
variables can be dropped from the analysis. We use this threshold of 0.9 where appropriate.
There exists a strong negative correlation between Fext and Fflex, approximately at -0.9. However,
we chose not to exclude either variable from our analysis due to their relevance in neuromotor
recovery. For stroke survivors with upper extremity impairment, hypertonia often results in distinct
patterns of volitional flexion (downward pushing force) and extension (upward pushing force)
improvement [40].
The correlation between the mean pressure for an activity, P , and maximum pressure for an
mean
activity, P , with the value of 0.80, indicates that the Motus Hand or Foot applied more pressure on
max
average in each activity; however, because this correlation fails to surpass the threshold of 0.90, we
do not drop either variable. Similarly, the correlation (0.60) between game time, t and game score,
game
Score, is intuitive: the longer a patient plays a game, the higher their score. Unfortunately, this
correlation also does not meet the threshold for exclusion in the final feature set.
Dimensionality Reduction
Another informative approach for analyzing the potential for dimensionality reduction in a feature
set is principal component analysis (PCA). Principal components are new variables constructed as
linear combinations of the initial variables. These linear combinations ensure that the new variables
(i.e., principal components) are uncorrelated and that as few components as possible contain most of
the information from the initial variables. Explained variance is a statistical measure of how much
variation in a dataset is attributable to each principal component (eigenvectors) generated by the
PCA method [41]. Explained variance thus allows us to rank the components in order of importance
and to focus on the most important ones when interpreting the results of our analysis.
In (Figure 5), we show the explained variance each principal component contributes to the total
variation in the feature set. No component can be described as dominant, as none accounts for more
than 20% of the variance in the initial data set.
Given this and the results from our correlation analysis, no variables present in the principal dataset
were excluded from the feature set.
Model Description
Here, we provide a brief overview of the models compared in the Results.
Logistic regression is a classical statistical technique for binary classification. The technique consists
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
of mapping the probability of an event happening to a logistic curve with the model inputs as
dependent variables. Logistic regression is still widely used and is a common first model when
performing classification because it is easy to implement and interpret.
Gradient Boosting Decision Tree (GBDT) is a widely used machine learning algorithm due to its
efficiency, accuracy, and interpretability [27]. The algorithm uses smaller “weaker classifiers” with a
number of leaves. By taking a weighted average of these several “weaker classifiers,” we then can
construct a “stronger classifier” [42]. By training several weaker models, this process is known as
AdaBoosting. It results in a stronger model by adding more leaves to the decision tree and taking a
weighted combination of these weaker models, where the weights are determined by the
performance [43].
The Deep Feed-Forward Neural Network (DNN) is a high-performance deep learning model with
varying hidden layers. Several architectures were tested on the training dataset to see if there was an
increase in performance by adding hidden layers (from four to eight) or a reduction in nodes in each
input layer [44]. The ReLU activation function was implemented into the model instead of the
sigmoid function. Both were tried. Accuracy results from the computational experiment could
surpass 80%, regardless of adding more layers, changing the hidden layer input size, or changing the
activation function. The best performing DNN trained in our analysis has three hidden layers with
the input size of the hidden layers as (8,5,8), respectively. Layer size, learning rates, batch size, and
epoch size were all hyper parameters tuned during the training process.
The Extra Trees Classifier (ETC) is an ensemble learning method for classification. Ensemble
learning is a machine learning technique that combines the predictions of multiple individual models
to produce a more accurate and robust final prediction. The basic idea is to train multiple models
independently, each with a different algorithm or set of hyperparameters, and then combine their
predictions at the end [45]. This is similar to the AdaBoosting concept with light gradient boosting,
where models can be combined by averaging or weighting their predictions [46]. The model uses
entropy as the splitting criterion for the trees, with 100% of the features considered at each split. The
maximum number of leaf nodes for each tree is 87,17, and the model is comprised of 42 trees [46].
Results
The original harmonized dataset (described in (Table 2)) contained all the scores, the minimum and
maximum ROM, and minimum and maximum pressure, and we took the maximum score per game
per session. Due to the smaller dataset, the training and testing were split on the 80%/20% principle,
where 80% of the data, the training set was used to train the models (with a subset of this set being
used for training hyperparameters where appropriate). The remaining 20%, the holdout test set, was
used to compare the performance of the models after training.
(Table 3) shows a performance based on 10-fold cross-validation for each machine learning
classification algorithm applied to the training set. K-fold cross-validation is used to verify that a
high-accuracy model does not necessarily overfit the training data. The training data set is randomly
divided into 10 different subsets, or “folds” [47]. Each of these folds is then used as the new training
data, while another is used as the new testing data for fitting a new model. We then take the mean
and standard deviation of the model accuracy across the 10 folds.
Table 3. Training set cross-validation classifier accuracy.
Classifier Mean Std
Extra Trees 96.40% 0.4%
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
Light Gradient Boosting 94.0% 0.4%
Neural Network 71.70% 0.7%
Logistic Regression 61.20% 0.5%
From (Table 3), it is clear that both the neural network and logistic regression perform poorly
compared to the tree-based methods (Extra Trees and Light Gradient Boosting). The poor
performance for logistic regression is likely due to the assumption that there is a linear relationship
between the features and the labels, that is, the points corresponding to each label can be nicely
separated by a hyper-plane (the N-dimensional extension of a line in 2D or plane in 3D). On the
other hand, neural networks tend to perform poorly on small datasets like the therapy dataset we
have compiled. This is because, while able to capture non-linear decision boundaries, neural
networks are prone to overfitting the training dataset. Tree-based methods provide an excellent
combination of low bias but are still able to capture a non-linear decision boundary.
(Figure 6) presents the confusion matrix of each of the supervised learning methods. A confusion
matrix is used to represent the algorithm’s performance visually. Each row of the matrix represents
the instances in an actual class, while each column represents the instances in a predicted class, or
vice versa. We represent the percentage over the exact numeric number for display purposes. Three
performance metrics come from the confusion matrix: precision, recall, and the F1-score. Accuracy
measures the proportion of predicted positives that are truly positive. Recall measures the proportion
of predicted negatives that are truly negative. To compare the performance of each model, we use the
F1-score. The F1-score is the harmonic mean of the precision and recall [31]. In this case, this is
macro-averaging (treating all classes equally important).
A full breakdown of the performance measures (precision, recall, and F1-score) for all models on the
holdout test set is shown in (Table 4). It is important to notice that while the Extra Tree Classifier has
a comparable accuracy (picking the correct label) with the Light Gradient Boosting (LGB) method,
LGB performs reliably better than all of the other models when also weighing false positives and
false negatives (precision, recall, and F1-score). Remarkably, the LGB model best fits the dataset
with a weighted average F1-score of 96.70% compared to logistic regression (55.8%), extra trees
(94.8%), and a deep feed-forward neural network (70.1%).
Table 4. Performance measures on the holdout test dataset for each model for each label type.
Model and label Performance Metric
Precision Recall F1-score
Extra Trees
Low 95.44% 92.83% 94.12%
High 94.46% 91.10% 92.75%
No 94.55% 97.04% 95.78%
Weighted Average 94.82% 94.84% 94.81%
LGB
Low 96.80% 95.61% 96.20%
High 96.49% 94.97% 95.73%
No 96.70% 97.83% 97.26%
Weighted Average 96.70% 96.70% 96.70%
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
DNN
Low 74.34% 64.94% 69.32%
High 61.93% 28.27% 38.82%
No 71.64% 87.71% 78.86%
Weighted Average 71.14% 71.94% 70.11%
Logistic Regression
Low 59.61% 37.61% 46.12%
High 48.77% 8.27% 14.15%
No 61.71% 89.42% 73.02%
Weighted Average 59.15% 60.96% 55.82%
Discussion
Principal Findings
We have demonstrated that objectively measured rehabilitation training combined with machine
learning methods can be effectively used to identify residual stroke severity classes. This approach
aims to enhance in-home self-guided, individualized stroke rehabilitation. We have tackled several
challenges commonly faced in healthcare applications of machine learning, such as processing data
with varying physical quantities, handling errors in sensory data, and addressing ambiguous
classifications due to human error.
Comparison to Prior Work
Previous studies have largely focused on predicting short- and long-term functional ability based on
clinical variables from an inpatient hospital stay immediately after stroke [16-18] or they have
utilized robotic measurements to predict clinical measurement scores [48, 49]. Meanwhile, our study
focuses on data collected during rehabilitation in the in-home setting that is used to predict residual
stroke severity.
In those previous studies, the algorithms most frequently employed were linear and logistic
regression. However, these methods showed poor accuracy (less than 80%) with our dataset,
prompting us to explore different approaches. We found that the Light Gradient Boosting (LGB)
method provided substantially higher accuracy, despite being applied to a relatively small dataset.
LGB is advantageous for online autonomous stroke residual severity classification; it is known to be
easily transferable and requires relatively little computational resources [27].
Strengths and Limitations
Our study design ensures that the model can make decisions based on summary statistics typically
available in an outpatient rehabilitation setting. This design enables retraining of the model in an
outpatient environment, similar to an in-home setting. Consequently, the model can offer a second
opinion on a patient’s stroke residual severity or potentially replace a clinician’s assessment. This
capability allows for a more targeted therapy routine based on the stroke residual severity
classification.
A notable limitation is that the model may need retraining to accommodate specific data collected in
each outpatient setting, accounting for differences in the data. Such data collection can be
challenging and/or costly, particularly for outpatient facilities with low patient volumes.
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
Future Directions
Future work involves building an expanded and more sophisticated dataset. Real-time processing of
sensor data will enable a classifier to interact with users online, recognizing and classifying subtle
changes in their motor function. This capability will allow clinicians (AI or otherwise) to prescribe
personalized, targeted interventions that are most impactful.
Additionally, integrating real-time understanding of a patient’s needs with an in-home robotic
therapy device like the Motus Hand and Motus Foot will provide immediate feedback. An AI in
therapeutic games can detect patient needs, such as fatigue, during a therapy session and adapt its
strategy accordingly.
Further research could also explore finer-grained severity classifications, such as labeling patients
based on their total range of motion or amount of tone, which would require more labeled data to
train the machine learning model properly.
Conclusion
Autonomous classification is becoming more important for successful rehabilitation as rehabilitation
begins to move out of the clinical setting. Still, it faces challenges with the accessibility and volume
of appropriate clinical data for training models and model access to user data for classification.
By leveraging the in-home stroke rehabilitation robotics provided by the Motus Hand and Motus
Foot, we have made significant progress in addressing these issues that prevent adequate training of
an autonomous classification model. With the data collected from self-guided in-home therapy
sessions, we could train a classification model to identify the stroke residual severity in 33 patients.
We compared four different models: Extra Trees, Light Gradient Boosting Method, Deep Feed-
Forward Neural Network, and Logistic Regression, finding the Light Gradient Boosting Method to
outscore the other three with an average F1-score of 94%. The Light Gradient Boosting Method is a
particularly powerful model for this case because it combines interpretability and portability.
Because our model relies only on therapy session summary statistics, the proposed method is
expected to be successful when applied to comparable rehabilitation data sets. Once trained, the
model is highly portable and can be integrated into similar rehabilitation settings, such as outpatient
rehabilitation facilities with appropriate technological resources, to provide an autonomous real-time
classification of stroke residual severity. Additionally, when paired with something like the Motus
Hand and Motus Foot technology, our classifier provides the opportunity to develop personalized
training based on the stroke residual severity of the individual and adapt the therapy exercises to
each patient’s needs. The efficacy of real-time classification and adaptation remains a subject of
future study.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Motus Nova for providing the raw sensor data utilized in this study.
Author contributions statement
R.J. and I.B. designed and conceptualized the study and contributed to project administration; I.B.
curated the data; R.G. and R.J. contributed to the methodology, investigation, and formal analysis.
All authors interpreted the results and drafted and edited the manuscript.
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
Funding Statement
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (USA) under Grant No. CMMI-
1953135.
Ethics approval
This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at Georgia State University. This
research involves the analysis of pre-existing, non-identifiable data. No direct interaction or
intervention with human subjects occurred during the course of this study. The study relies solely on
data generated by the commercial company Motus Nova for non-research purposes. All methods
followed relevant guidelines and regulations approved by the Georgia State University IRB that
waived the informed consent and designated this study as no human subjects research.
Conflicts of Interest
Both Russell Jeter (Director of Analytics) and Stephen N. Housley (Chief Scientific Officer) were
employed by Motus Nova at the time of data collection for this study. Although the access to in-
home stroke rehabilitation data, collected using the Motus Hand and Motus Foot devices and
provided by Motus Nova, was crucial for the conception of this study, the company did not influence
the methods, results, or discussions presented herein. All analyses and interpretations were conducted
independently by the research team to ensure unbiased and objective findings.
Data Availability
The raw sensor data provided by Motus Nova is proprietary and cannot be shared. The processed,
anonymized therapy session summary data used for model training and analysis are available from
the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Abbreviations
DNN: Deep Neural Network
LR: Logistic Regression
LGB: Light Gradient Boosting
AI: Artificial Intelligence
ETC: Extra Trees Classifier
ROM: Range of Motion
PCA: Principal Component Analysis
GBDT: Gradient Boosting Decision Tree
ReLU: Rectified Linear Unit
Bibliography
[1 V. L. Feigin, B. A. Stark, C. O. Johnson, G. A. Roth, C. Bisignano, G. G. Abady, M. Abbasifard,
] M. Abbasi-Kangevari, F. Abd-Allah, V. Abedi and others, "Global, regional, and national burden
of stroke and its risk factors, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease
Study 2019," The Lancet Neurology, vol. 20, p. 795–820, 2021.
[2 C. O. Johnson, M. Nguyen, G. A. Roth, E. Nichols, T. Alam, D. Abate, F. Abd-Allah, A.
] Abdelalim, H. N. Abraha, N. M. E. Abu-Rmeileh and others, "Global, regional, and national
burden of stroke, 1990–2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study
2016," The Lancet Neurology, vol. 18, p. 439–458, 2019.
[3 K. Epalte, A. Grjadovojs and G. Bērziņa, "Use of the Digital Assistant Vigo in the Home
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
] Environment for Stroke Recovery: Focus Group Discussion With Specialists Working in
Neurorehabilitation," JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol, vol. 10, no. e44285 , 2023.
[4 A. Arntz, F. Weber, M. Handgraaf, K. Lällä, K. Korniloff, K.-P. Murtonen, J. Chichaeva, A.
] Kidritsch, M. Heller, E. Sakellari, C. Athanasopoulou, A. Lagiou and I. Tzonichaki,
"Technologies in Home-Based Digital Rehabilitation: Scoping Review".
[5 M. Broderick, R. O'Shea, J. Burridge, S. Demain, L. Johnson and P. Bentley, "Examining
] Usability, Acceptability, and Adoption of a Self-Directed, Technology-Based Intervention for
Upper Limb Rehabilitation After Stroke: Cohort Study," JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol, vol. 10,
no. e45993, 2023.
[6 M. A. Reyna, C. Josef, S. Seyedi, R. Jeter, S. P. Shashikumar, M. Brandon Westover, A. Sharma,
] S. Nemati and G. D. Clifford, "Early Prediction of Sepsis from Clinical Data: the
PhysioNet/Computing in Cardiology Challenge 2019," in 2019 Computing in Cardiology
(CinC), 2019.
[7 R. O. Alabi, M. Elmusrati, I. Sawazaki-Calone, L. P. Kowalski, C. Haglund, R. D. Coletta, A. A.
] Mäkitie, T. Salo, A. Almangush and I. Leivo, "Comparison of supervised machine learning
classification techniques in prediction of locoregional recurrences in early oral tongue cancer,"
International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 136, p. 104068, 2020.
[8 A. Cerasa, G. Tartarisco, R. Bruschetta, I. Ciancarelli, G. Morone, R. S. Calabrò, G. Pioggia, P.
] Tonin and M. Iosa, "Predicting outcome in patients with brain injury: differences between
machine learning versus conventional statistics," Biomedicines, vol. 10, p. 2267, 2022.
[9 Y. Harari, M. K. O’Brien, R. L. Lieber and A. Jayaraman, "Inpatient stroke rehabilitation:
] prediction of clinical outcomes using a machine-learning approach," Journal of
NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, vol. 17, p. 1–10, 2020.
[1 S. Campagnini, C. Arienti, M. Patrini, P. Liuzzi, A. Mannini and M. C. Carrozza, "Machine
0] learning methods for functional recovery prediction and prognosis in post-stroke rehabilitation:
A systematic review," Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, vol. 19, p. 1–22, 2022.
[1 J. N. Heo, J. G. Yoon, H. Park, Y. D. Kim, H. S. Nam and J. H. Heo, "Machine Learning-Based
1] Model for Prediction of Outcomes in Acute Stroke," Stroke, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 1263-1265, May
2019.
[1 H. Saber, M. Somai, G. B. Rajah, F. Scalzo and D. S. Liebeskind, "Predictive analytics and
2] machine learning in stroke and neurovascular medicine," Neurological Research, vol. 41, pp.
681-690, 2019.
[1 W. Wang, M. Kiik, N. Peek, V. Curcin, I. J. Marshall, A. G. Rudd, Y. Wang, A. Douiri, C. D.
3] Wolfe and B. Bray, "A systematic review of machine learning models for predicting outcomes of
stroke with structured data," PloS One, vol. 15, p. e0234722, 2020.
[1 C. Fernandez-Lozano, P. Hervella, V. Mato-Abad, M. Rodrı́guez-Yáñez, S. Suárez-Garaboa, I.
4] López-Dequidt, A. Estany-Gestal, T. Sobrino, F. Campos, J. Castillo and others, "Random forest-
based prediction of stroke outcome," Scientific reports, vol. 11, p. 10071, 2021.
[1 N. Someeh, M. Mirfeizi, M. Asghari-Jafarabadi, S. Alinia, F. Farzipoor and S. M.
5] Shamshirgaran, "Predicting mortality in brain stroke patients using neural networks: outcomes
analysis in a longitudinal study," Scientific Reports, vol. 13, p. 18530, 2023.
[1 W.-Y. Lin, C.-H. Chen, Y.-J. Tseng, Y.-T. Tsai, C.-Y. Chang, H.-Y. Wang and C.-K. Chen,
6] "Predicting post-stroke activities of daily living through a machine learning-based approach on
initiating rehabilitation," International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 111, p. 159–164,
2018.
[1 V. P. Gupta, A. L. A. Garton, J. A. Sisti, B. R. Christophe, A. S. Lord, A. K. Lewis, H.-P. Frey, J.
7] Claassen and E. S. Connolly, "Prognosticating functional outcome after intracerebral
hemorrhage: The ICHOP score," World Neurosurgery, vol. 101, p. 577–583, 2017.
[1 J. K. Kim, Y. J. Choo and M. C. Chang, "Prediction of motor function in stroke patients using
8] machine learning algorithm: Development of practical models," Journal of Stroke and
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
Cerebrovascular Diseases, vol. 30, p. 105856, 2021.
[1 A. Butler, S. N. Housley, Y.-A. Chen and S. Wolf, "Increasing access to cost effective home-
9] based robotic telerehabilitation for stroke survivors," 2017 International Symposium on
Wearable Robotics and Rehabilitation (WeRob), 2017.
[2 L. Sawaki, A. J. Butler, X. Leng, P. A. Wassenaar, Y. M. Mohammad, S. Blanton, K. Sathian, D.
0] S. Nichols-Larsen, S. L. Wolf, D. C. Good and G. F. Wittenberg, "Constraint-induced movement
therapy results in increased motor map area in subjects 3 to 9 months after stroke,"
Neurorehabilitation and neural repair, vol. 22, no. 5, 2008.
[2 S. L. Wolf, S. Blanton, H. Baer, J. Breshears and A. J. Butler, "Repetitive task practice: a critical
1] review of constraint-induced movement therapy in stroke," The Neurologist, vol. 8, no. 6, 2002.
[2 A. J. Butler, C. Bay, D. Wu, K. M. Richards, S. Buchanan and M. Yepes, "Expanding tele-
2] rehabilitation of stroke through in-home robot-assisted therapy," International Journal of
Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, vol. 2, p. 1–11, 2014.
[2 S. L. Wolf, K. Sahu, R. C. Bay, S. Buchanan, A. Reiss, S. Linder, A. Rosenfeldt and J. Alberts,
3] "The HAAPI (Home Arm Assistance Progression Initiative) trial," Neurorehabilitation and
Neural Repair, vol. 29, p. 958–968, 2015.
[2 S. Cai, G. Li, X. Zhang, S. Huang, H. Zheng, K. Ma and L. Xie, "Detecting compensatory
4] movements of stroke survivors using pressure distribution data and machine learning
algorithms," Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, vol. 16, p. 1–11, 2019.
[2 H. K. Thakkar, W.-w. Liao, C.-y. Wu, Y.-W. Hsieh and T.-H. Lee, "Predicting clinically
5] significant motor function improvement after contemporary task-oriented interventions using
machine learning approaches," Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, vol. 17, p. 1–
10, 2020.
[2 V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou, D. Wierstra and M. Riedmiller,
6] "Playing Atari with deep reinforcement learning," arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
[2 G. Ke, Q. Meng, T. Finely, T. Wang, W. Chen, W. Ma, Q. Ye and T.-Y. Liu, "LightGBM: A
7] Highly Efficient Gradient Boosting Decision Tree," in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 30 (NIP 2017), 2017.
[2 P. Geurts, D. Ernst and L. Wehenkel, "Extremely randomized trees," Machine Learning, vol. 63,
8] p. 3–42, 2006.
[2 S. Wang, G. Cao and Z. Shang, "Deep Neural Network Classifier for Multi-dimensional
9] Functional Data," arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.08592, 2022.
[3 P. Xie, J. K. Kim, Y. Zhou, Q. Ho, A. Kumar, Y. Yu and E. Xing, "Distributed machine learning
0] via sufficient factor broadcasting," arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.08486, 2015.
[3 I. Düntsch and G. Gediga, "Confusion Matrices and Rough Set Data Analysis," Journal of
1] Physics: Conference Series, vol. 1229, p. 012055, May 2019.
[3 S. N. Z. Naqvi, S. Yfantidou and E. Zimányi, "Time series databases and InfluxDB,"
2] Studienarbeit, Université Libre de Bruxelles, vol. 12, p. 1–44, 2017.
[3 F. Porciuncula, A. V. Roto, D. Kumar, I. Davis, S. Roy, C. J. Walsh and L. N. Awad, "Wearable
3] Movement Sensors for Rehabilitation: A Focused Review of Technological and Clinical
Advances," PM & R, vol. 10, no. 9 Suppl 2, p. S220–S232, 2018.
[3 A. Gopal, W.-Y. Hsu, D. D. Allen and R. Bove, "Remote Assessments of Hand Function in
4] Neurological Disorders: Systematic Review".
[3 P. Maceira-Elvira, T. Popa, A.-C. Schmid and F. C. Hummel, "Wearable technology in stroke
5] rehabilitation: towards improved diagnosis and treatment of upper-limb motor impairment,"
Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, vol. 16, p. 1–18, 2019.
[3 J. Sola and J. Sevilla, "Importance of input data normalization for the application of neural
6] networks to complex industrial problems," IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, vol. 44, p.
1464–1468, 1997.
[3 M. L. Goldstein, S. A. Morris and G. G. Yen, "Problems with fitting to the power-law
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
7] distribution," The European Physical Journal B-Condensed Matter and Complex Systems, vol.
41, p. 255–258, 2004.
[3 R. Bro and A. K. Smilde, "Principal component analysis," Analytical Methods, vol. 6, p. 2812–
8] 2831, 2014.
[3 Y. Shin and C. Park, "Analysis of Correlation Based Dimension Reduction Methods.," Applied
9] Mathematics and Computer Science, vol. 21, pp. 549-558, September 2011.
[4 A. Doussoulin, J. Bacco C. Rivas, and J. Saiz, " Association Between Postural Patterns of
0] Spastic Upper Extremity and Functional Independence after TBI and Stroke,"
NeuroRehabilitation, vol. 6, no. 4, p. 551-559, 2020.
S. Wold, K. Esbensen and P. Geladi, "Principal component analysis," Chemometrics and
[4 Intelligent Laboratory Systems, vol. 2, p. 37–52, 1987.
1]
[4 R. E. Schapire, "The strength of weak learnability," Machine Learning, vol. 5, p. 197–227, 1990.
2]
[4 T. Chengsheng, L. Huacheng and X. Bing, "AdaBoost typical Algorithm and its application
3] research," in MATEC Web of Conferences, 2017.
[4 S. Shamshirband, M. Fathi, A. Dehzangi, A. T. Chronopoulos and H. Alinejad-Rokny, "A review
4] on deep learning approaches in healthcare systems: Taxonomies, challenges, and open issues,"
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 113, p. 103627, 2021.
[4 M. A. Ganaie, M. Hu, A. K. Malik, M. Tanveer and P. N. Suganthan, "Ensemble deep learning: A
5] review," Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, vol. 115, p. 105151, 2022.
[4 M. Arya, H. Sastry G, A. Motwani, S. Kumar and A. Zaguia, "A novel extra tree ensemble
6] optimized dl framework (Eteodl) for early detection of diabetes," Frontiers in Public Health, vol.
9, p. 797877, 2022.
[4 J. Shao, "Linear model selection by cross-validation," Journal of the American Statistical
7] Association, vol. 88, p. 486–494, 1993.
[4 J. Zariffa, M. Myers, M. Coahran and R. H. Wang, "Smallest real differences for robotic
8] measures of upper extremity function after stroke: Implications for tracking recovery," Journal
of Rehabilitation and Assistive Technologies Engineering, vol. 5, p. 205566831878803, January
2018.
[4 S. M. Mostafavi, J. I. Glasgow, S. P. Dukelow, S. H. Scott and P. Mousavi, "Prediction of stroke-
9] related diagnostic and prognostic measures using robot-based evaluation," in 2013 IEEE 13th
International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR), 2013.
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
Supplementary Files
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
Figures
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
Patients do therapy sessions with the Motus Hand or Motus Foot using a pneumatically-driven exogenous robotic device worn
on the affected hand/arm/foot (the Motus Hand is depicted in the bottom panel). The peripheral acts as a game controller
(through an angle sensor embedded in the wrist joint) that allows users to play therapeutic video games that dynamically adapt
to their needs and provide the requisite assistance/resistance (computer screen in the bottom panel).
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
Concept diagram of the overall data analysis and modeling. 33 patients perform in-home therapy using the Motus Hand and
Motus Foot rehabilitation devices. Sensors in the devices capture live angle and pressure data. This data is then processed and
summarized to provide summary statistics of 32,902 therapeutic activities. This provides the base dataset for the analysis
presented in this paper, with 11 features and 32,902 points. That data is then split and prepared for use in training a supervised
machine-learning model to classify the stroke severity of the patient.
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
Example of the distribution plots for four of the random variables separated by the class label from the clinician. Subsequently,
random variables are distributed normally, which is crucial for using the z-score when inputting into a machine learning
algorithm.
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
Correlation matrix for the feature set, excluding identification variables such as Patient ID, Session ID, Game ID, and Start
Time. A correlation threshold of |Cor(X, Y)| > 0.9 was used for variable exclusion in dimensionality reduction. Notably, Fflex
and Fext show a strong negative correlation. Despite this, both were included in the analysis because the development of
downward pushing strength (flexion in upper extremities, plantarflexion in lower extremities) does not imply the development
of upward pushing strength (extension in upper extremities, dorsiflexion in lower extremities).
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
Depiction of the principal components with the explained variance ratio. As shown, 95% of the explained variance is
contributed by all principal components. As a result, all variables are used in the machine learning model for the analysis.
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
Confusion matrices for LGB and Logistic Regression. Considering the false negative column of the No classification, it is seen
that the LGB model greatly improved this classification. This is especially important when classifying a patient as having “No”
stroke severity when they are actually a “High” severity. Misclassifications can be particularly dangerous, ranging from
providing inadequate therapy to a high-range-of-motion patient to injuring a low-range-of-motion user with therapy designed
for a high-range-of-motion user.
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Jeter et al
Classification reports for Light Gradient Boosting and Logistic Regression to compare the model performance based on each
class’s accuracy, macro average, and weighted average. As shown, the LGB model is 73% better in terms of accuracy and
F1-score compared to the logistic regression model.
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/56980 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)