2021 ВЕСТНИК САНКТ-ПЕТЕРБУРГСКОГО УНИВЕРСИТЕТА Т. 12. Вып. 1
ПРАВО
СРАВНИТЕЛЬНОЕ ПРАВО
UDC 341.9, 342, 349
Legal regulation of the transmission of health-related data:
Balance of public interests and individual rights in
the context of cross-border health care*
I. M. Akulin1, E. A. Chesnokova1, U. Genovese2,
R. A. Presnyakov3, A. E. Pryadko4
1 St. Petersburg State University,
7–9, Universitetskaya nab., St. Petersburg, 199034, Russian Federation
2 University of Milan,
7, Via Festa del Perdono, Milan, 20122, Italy
3 Association of Medical Law of St. Petersburg,
29A, 18th line of V. O., St. Petersburg, 199178, Russian Federation
4 Committee for Social Protection of the Population of the Leningrad Region,
6A, Afonskaya ul., St. Petersburg, 191124, Russian Federation
For citation: Akulin, Igor M., Ekaterina A. Chesnokova, Umberto Genovese, Roman A. Presnyakov,
Anastasia E. Pryadko. 2021. “Legal regulation of the transmission of health-related data: Balance
of public interests and individual rights in the context of cross-border health care”. Vestnik of Saint
Petersburg University. Law 2: 419–440. https://doi.org/10.21638/spbu14.2021.211
The article provides a comparative analysis of the regulatory and legal regulation for the pro-
cessing of a special category of personal health data in the European Union and in the Russian
Federation in regard to the digitalization of national health systems. Special attention is paid
to the legal framework for the transmission of health information at the cross-border level.
It is established that within the framework of European and Russian legislation at this stage,
in the context of the formation of digital medicine, there is a comparability in the definition
of legal mechanisms for the protection of medical data. It is also noted that in the issue of
the transfer of personal health data to third countries, both the Russian Federation and the
European Union choose the path of strict restrictive regulation and the introduction of a
closed list of grounds for overcoming the ban on cross-border transfer. The reasons for this ap-
proach to issues of supranational interaction in healthcare are analyzed, as well as the potential
risks of inertia of national legislators in this issue. Based on the analysis, the authors propose
* The reported study was funded by the RFBR according to the research project No. 18-29-16215.
© St. Petersburg State University, 2021
https://doi.org/10.21638/spbu14.2021.211 419
a number of amendments and additions to the national legislation on personal data, aimed at
simplifying the interaction between jurisdictions on the transfer of confidential medical in-
formation. The authors suggest an international agreement on the exchange of medical data in
digital format, which potentially should include not only the Russian Federation and the EU
states, but also other countries, including Eurasian Economic Union member states, China,
and countries of the American continent. The proposed concept is intended to create an op-
portunity for the formation of a supranational information system in the field of healthcare,
which allows for the effective exchange of medical data, taking into account the sovereign
interests of the countries participating in the agreement.
Keywords: legislation of the European Union, legislation of the Russian Federation, personal
data, medical confidentiality, e-health, data exchange, personal data protection.
1. Introduction
In recent years, we have witnessed and participated in a digital rethinking of almost
all fields of social relations. This transformation, on the one hand, facilitates access to in-
formation and various services, and on the other hand, fundamentally changes the model
of social interaction of people and forms a new kind of public institutions.
One of the most important public institutions undergoing transformation is health-
care. Developed world economies are becoming more and more active in implementing
modern digital tools: electronic medical cards, electronic prescriptions, online appoint-
ments, etc. Information and telecommunication technologies are becoming a common re-
ality, designed to improve the quality and availability of medical care, to ensure maximum
respect for the rights of patients. However, digital transformation in medicine, along with
the obvious advantages, creates prerequisites for new risks. Such prerequisites are a rapid
increase in the number of information repositories with sensitive data, emergence of new
typologies of information, uncontrolled or insufficiently controlled number of persons
who can potentially access them, as well as participation of unscrupulous organizations in
processing of confidential medical information.
Another factor influencing healthcare transformation is globalization: an increase in
migratory activity and in-depth economic integration are the factors driving the familiar
national model of healthcare organization to transition to a supranational level and build
new structures of interaction between different legal systems. Such convergence of na-
tional systems becomes inevitable in the new realities of the digital economy.
The primary link of the supranational model is the cross-border transfer of confi-
dential medical information, which has the same potential risks as the national regulation
of “reception” and “transfer” countries. In this regard, it is interesting to summarize the
experience of supranational regulation in the European Union (hereinafter — the Euro-
pean Union, the EU, the Union) and the Russian Federation in regard to legal regulation
of processing personal data in conditions of economic and political integration of states.
In this aspect, the analysis of the relevant Russian and European regulations may be par-
ticularly noteworthy for both the EU member states and the Eurasian Economic Union
(EAEU) member states.
420 Вестник СПбГУ. Право. 2021. Т. 12. Вып. 2
2. Basic research
2.1. Regulatory and legal framework for personal data within
the European Union: providing security during the exchange of confidential
medical information
On May 25, 2018 the EU Regulation 2016/679 General Data Protection Regulation
(hereinafter — the Regulation, GDPR) entered into force in the European Union1. The
GDPR is designed to respond to new technological challenges in order to achieve higher
legal certainty, harmonization of legal systems and ease the regulation of transferring per-
sonal data outside the EU to third jurisdictions. Thus, in accordance with paragraph 10 of
the Preamble of the EU Regulation 2016/679 GDPR in order to ensure a consistent and
high level of protection of natural persons and to remove the obstacles to flows of personal
data within the Union, the level of protection of the rights and freedoms of natural per-
sons with regard to the processing of such data should be equivalent in all member states.
Consistent and homogenous application of the rules for the protection of the fundamen-
tal rights and freedoms of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data
should be ensured throughout the Union.
This regulation superseded the previous Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parlia-
ment and of the Council of the EU2 which, in fact, is no longer able to fully regulate legal
relations between entities in the face of new challenges posed by scientific and technologi-
cal progress. Yet the objectives and principles of Directive 95/46/EC remain sound (para-
graph 9 of the Preamble of the Regulation (EU) 2016/679 GDPR).
Thus, according to the Regulation, the European Parliament and the EU Council
pursue an ambitious goal of harmonizing legislation on the protection of personal data
in the EU member states and creating a united digital information space throughout the
European Union.
The General Data Protection Regulation is an act with a direct effect, its provisions
are binding for all EU member states and do not need to be ratified at the level of each EU
member state, and the Regulation applies to the European Economic Area. However, the
regulation still provides EU member states a free hand to determine requirements, includ-
ing for the purpose of processing special categories of personal data. Thus, the Regulation
does not exclude the legislation of the EU member state, which establishes the circum-
stances for special processing situations, including a more precise determination of con-
ditions when the personal data will be based on the principle of legality. This fact raises
concern for some authors as the provisions of the Regulation to some degree betray the
original European idea of harmonization of legislation and may become the reason for the
emergence of contrasts between the Regulation and the national laws enacted just because
of the need to align national and European regulations (Cataleta, Longo, Natale 2020).
1 Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the
protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of
such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation). EUR-Lex. European
Union law. Accessed July 16, 2019. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1563114709430
&uri=CELEX:32016R0679.
2 Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the
protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such
data. EUR-Lex. European Union law. Accessed July 16, 2019. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/en/
TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A31995L0046.
Вестник СПбГУ. Право. 2021. Т. 12. Вып. 2 421
The Regulation establishes the principle of extraterritoriality. Provisions of this act
shall be applied if the data processing is related to offering goods or services to natu-
ral persons — data subjects located in the Union, regardless of payments (paragraph
23 of the Preamble of the Regulation (EU) 2016/679 GDPR) and when it is related to the
monitoring of the behaviour of such data subjects in so far as their behaviour takes place
within the Union, irrespective of the place of establishment of the controller or the per-
son in charge of data processing (paragraph 24 of the Preamble of the Regulation (EU)
2016/679 GDPR). The stated above provisions clearly show a degree of orientation of the
European legislator in the first place towards data processing in the field of commercial
activity. This is evidenced by the reference to the supply of goods or services, as well as an
emphasis on data processing for making decisions related to a natural person located in
the EU, or for the analysis or prediction of his/her personal preferences, types of behav-
iour and attitudes.
At the same time, it should be emphasized that the guarantees of protection provided
by the Regulation apply to all natural persons in the EU, regardless of their citizenship,
place of registration or place of residence. In paragraphs 23 and 24 cited above, any natu-
ral person who is in the Union without indication of their citizenship is considered a data
subject. In addition, paragraph 2 of the Preamble of the Regulation states: “The principles
of, and rules on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of their
personal data should, whatever their nationality or residence, respect their fundamental
rights and freedoms, in particular their right to the protection of personal data”.
Accordingly, the Regulation for the range of data subjects is applied to all citizens of
the Union, persons permanently residing in the territory of the Union, as well as to all in-
dividuals in the Union regardless of the purpose and duration of their stay. In this case, the
location of the operator processing the data of the above entities does not matter. There-
fore, the subject of Regulation also includes cases when citizens and residents of the Rus-
sian Federation seek medical care in medical organizations in the territory of the Union.
It should be noted that the Regulation does not provide for a special discipline gov-
erning the processing of personal data concerning health, but it does contain a number of
provisions related to this category of personal data.
The definition provided in paragraph 15 of article 4 of the Regulation, where the term
“data concerning health” means personal data related to the physical or mental health of a
natural person, including the provision of health care services, which reveal information
about his or her health status.
Paragraph 35 of the Preamble of the Regulation discloses the content of data affecting
the state of health, which states that health-related personal data should include all data
that is related to the state of health of the data subject and disclose information about the
past, current and future physical or psychological state of the data subject’s health. This
also includes complete information about an individual collected in the course of registra-
tion or provision of medical services according to the Directive 2011/24/EU of the Euro-
pean Parliament and of EU Council3.
3 In accordance with the provisions of Directive 2011/24/EU of the European Parliament and of the
Council of the EU, the information about a natural person collected during registration or the provision
of medical services includes: a number, symbol or mark assigned to an individual to uniquely identify that
person for health purposes; information obtained from a study or examination of a body part or body
material, including genetic data and biological samples; and any information, such as disease, disability, risk
422 Вестник СПбГУ. Право. 2021. Т. 12. Вып. 2
At the same time, it should be noted that the legislator pays special attention to the
problem of circulation of data, which to some extent is related to the subject’s state of
health. In particular, this is evidenced by the specification given in paragraph 35 of the
Preamble of the Regulation, which states that all data that is related to the state of health
of the data subject and discloses information not only about current but also about the
past and future health of the data subject, and the health status concerns both the subject’s
physical and psychological status.
Further, the definition contains quite a detailed description of the content of the con-
cept. Data concerning health includes:
— information about the natural person collected in the course of the registration
for, or the provision of, health care services as referred to in Directive 2011/24/EU
of the European Parliament and of the Council to that natural person;
— a number, symbol, or mark particularly assigned to a natural person to uniquely
identify the natural person for health purposes;
— information derived from the testing or examination of a body part or body sub-
stance, including from genetic data and biological samples;
— and any information on, for example, a disease, disability, disease risk, medical
history, clinical treatment or the physiological or biomedical state of the data sub-
ject independent of its source, for example from a physician or other health pro-
fessional, a hospital, a medical device or an in vitro diagnostic test.
The final provision establishes an open and indicative nature of the list. Thus, the
main criterion for classifying data as special is their relevance to information about the
physical or psychological state of the subject.
Of particular interest is the fact that in the Regulation the European legislator in-
cludes in the “data concerning health” category not only data on examinations and medi-
cal services, but also genetic and biometric data. It should be noted that this decision is
to some extent a novelty in European norm-setting: the provisions of Directive 95/46/EC
preceding the Regulation did not include this category of information in the category on
data concerning health.
Health information, as the most sensitive (confidential), belongs to a special category
of data and is subject to enhanced protection in terms of guarantees of observance of
fundamental human and civil rights and freedoms. However, it is obvious that such close
attention to the protection of the data concerning health is also based on the understand-
ing of the importance of providing security of this information in the public interest, and,
above all, in order to maintain competitiveness, state security, and national sovereignty. In
the European Union, where national borders are more or less non-existent and integra-
tion is based on four fundamental European freedoms: freedom of movement of persons,
capitals, goods, services, freedom of information flow is a prerequisite for successful in-
tegration and implementation of a single policy. In this regard, the Regulation establish-
es unified rules for circulation of personal information and introduces unified rules for
the transfer of information to third parties. It is interesting, however, that the Regulation
of disease, medical history, clinical treatment, or physiological or biomedical condition of the data subject,
regardless of the source of the data, for example, it may be obtained from a physician or other medical
professional, hospital, medical equipment, or laboratory diagnosis (Accessed February 17, 2021. https://
eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2011:088:0045:0065:en:PDF).
Вестник СПбГУ. Право. 2021. Т. 12. Вып. 2 423
leaves room for member states, at the legislative level, to provide additional conditions or
even restrictions on the processing and transmission of information. At the same time, an
extent of readiness of the EU States to make autonomous decisions that strengthen the le-
gal regime for the protection of data concerning health, in our opinion, will be determined
by political, social and economic factors.
Thus, the Regulation establishes a basic, minimum level, of personal data protec-
tion, which should be provided in all member states, and throughout the EU. Part 1 of
article 9 of the Regulation proclaims a general principle prohibiting any processing of data
concerning health4. However, this prohibition does not apply to a number of situations
related to medical services as a whole. In particular, the provisions of § 2 of article 9 of the
Regulation allow processing of data concerning health in special public interest, as well
as if it is necessary for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical
research purposes or statistical purposes in accordance with Article 89 based on Union
or Member State law which shall be proportionate to the aim pursued, respect the essence
of the right to data protection and provide for suitable and specific measures to safeguard
the fundamental rights and the interests of the data subject (sub-paragraphs g, j § 2 of
article 9 of the Regulation (EU) 2016/679 GDPR). Processing in the public interest is also
allowed when it is necessary in the area of public health, such as protecting against serious
cross-border threats to health or ensuring high standards of quality and safety of health
care and of medicinal products or medical devices, on the basis of Union or Member State
law which provides for suitable and specific measures to safeguard the rights and free-
doms of the data subject, in particular professional secrecy (sub-paragraph i § 2 of article
9 of the Regulation (EU) 2016/679 GDPR). This provision is particularly significant in
terms of European integration. The Regulation establishes the priority of public interests
in the field of public healthcare in its cross-border understanding, allowing the process-
ing of personal data, including protection against serious cross-border threats to health,
regardless of the will of the personal data subject. It can be assumed that this provision
will contribute to the development of a new model of public healthcare that goes beyond
national borders and involves more active interaction of all participants in the healthcare
system at the EU level.
Processing of health data is also allowed in other cases5, but the most interesting, in
our opinion, are the provisions that lift a ban on processing data concerning health when:
— the data subject has given explicit consent to the processing of personal data for
one or more specified purposes, except where Union or member state law provide
that the prohibition may not be lifted by the data subject (a);
— processing is necessary to protect the vital interests of the data subject or of an-
other natural person where the data subject is physically or legally incapable of
giving consent (c);
— processing relates to personal data which is manifestly made public by the data
subject (e).
4 Part 1 of article 9 of the EU Regulation 2016/679 GDPR specifies that the processing of personal data
revealing racial or ethnic origin, political views, religious beliefs or philosophical views, membership in a
trade union, as well as the processing of genetic data, biometric data for unambiguous identification of an
individual, data relating to the health, sexual life or sexual orientation of an individual, should be prohibited.
5 In this case, the authors want to point to other cases provided by the provisions of sub-paragraphs b,
d, f § 2 of article 9 of the EU Regulation 2016/679 GDPR, as well as the provisions of sub-paragraph h § 3 of
article 9 of the EU Regulation 2016/679 GDPR.
424 Вестник СПбГУ. Право. 2021. Т. 12. Вып. 2
This list of exceptions should be considered closed and not subject to broad inter-
pretation. It should be noted, however, that § 4 of the cited article still provides the EU
member states with the possibility of national regulation of health data protection. Thus,
the EU member states will be able to maintain or introduce additional conditions, includ-
ing restrictions, regarding the processing of genetic data, biometrical data or health data
(Article 4 of the Regulation (EU) 2016/679 GDPR). It seems that this provision should
be considered in the sense of possibly further strengthening the protection mechanisms
and limitation of the possibilities for personal data processing. For example, as mentioned
above, the Regulation establishes a general rule that a ban on the processing of health data
can be overcome by the will of the data subject, but it also indicates that the national legis-
lator is allowed to impose a restriction on the ability to dispose of their data.
The basic principles established by the Regulation are the principles of maximum
transparency when working with personal data and awareness of the data subject. Ac-
cording to part 1 of article 15 of the Regulation, in the case of processing of personal data
belonging to an individual the data subject has the right to access their own personal
data, as well as information about the purposes of processing, the category of processed
personal data, the recipients to whom the data will be disclosed, the terms of data storage
or the criteria used to determine the specified period, the right to request correction or
deletion of data (“the right to be forgotten”), restrictions on its processing, or objections,
the right to file a complaint with the supervisory authority, the presence of an automated
decision-making process, as well as the source of data in case personal data is not received
not from the data subject.
Articles 13 and 14 of the Regulation establish a minimum list of information that the
controller must provide to the personal data subject.
Articles 33 and 34 regulate the obligation to report data leakage. In accordance with
article 33, in case of data leakage the controller should within 72 hours from the time
when they have became aware of it, notify the supervisory authority about the leak with a
description of the nature of leakage of personal data, indicating where possible the catego-
ries and approximate number of data subjects and the categories and approximate number
of records of personal data, the possible consequences of the data leakage, as well as mea-
sures taken or planned by the controller to eliminate violations and measures to mitigate
its possible negative impacts.
Article 34 imposes a duty of the controller to inform the data subject within a rea-
sonable time on the leakage of personal data in case of a potentially high degree of risk
for rights and freedoms of individuals. At the same time, as follows from the meaning of
the article, if the leakage of personal data can lead to a high degree of risk for rights and
freedoms of individuals, the controller shall report the incident to the data subject only if
it requires a disproportionate effort, and if the controller resorted to public notification.
In accordance with part 1 of article 12, the above-mentioned information should be
provided in a concise, transparent, understandable and easily accessible form that uses
clear and simple language. The Regulation establishes a written form of the information
document, but it is additionally provided that at the request of the data subject informa-
tion may be provided verbally on the condition that the identity of the data subject is
confirmed in another way.
It seems that these provisions are of particular importance in relation to health data
as a special category of personal data.
Вестник СПбГУ. Право. 2021. Т. 12. Вып. 2 425
As mentioned above, the Regulation does not contain a special section establishing
rules for processing of data concerning health. The European legislator puts this informa-
tion into a special category of personal data, and it is subject to protection in accordance
with the provisions of the Regulation on personal data and the rules referring to a special
category of personal data.
In terms of principles of legality and transparency, the general condition for data
processing rests on the consent of the personal data subject. Deviation from this rule is
possible only in the cases directly stated in the Regulation. Article 7 of the Regulation
establishes conditions for obtaining the consent of the subject. Part 2 of article 7 of the
Regulation determines the criterion of awareness and regulates situations when consent to
data processing is given in writing in the context of a comprehensive agreement on vari-
ous issues: the request for consent should be presented in an understandable and easily
accessible form in clear and layperson terms in a manner that distinctly distinguishes it
from any other circumstances.
Interestingly, the Regulation does not impose on the operator the obligation to obtain
consent in writing, but it contains the obligation “to be able to prove that the data subject
has agreed to the processing of their personal data” (part 1 of article 7 of the Regulation
(EU) 2016/679 GDPR).
Also, part 3 of the cited article establishes the right of the subject at any time to with-
draw previously given consent. In that event it is provided, the procedure for consent
withdrawal should be as simple as the procedure for granting consent.
It is of interest in the comparative aspect that article 20 of the Regulation contains
the right of the subject to receive from the controller copies related to personal data in a
structured, universal and machine-readable format, as well as the right of the subject to
transfer the data to another controller.
Special categories of personal data are also subject to enhanced protection in the con-
text of an automated decision-making process, including the formation of a profile. Thus,
in particular, the general rule establishing the right of the subject of any personal data
not to fall within the scope of a decision based solely on automatic processing, including
the formation of a profile that creates legal consequences in relation to them or signifi-
cantly affects them, does not apply if decision-making is permitted by the legislation of
the Union or the EU member state, under which the controller falls. It also establishes
acceptable measures for protection of the rights, freedoms and legitimate interests of the
data subject, as well as, upon the controller’s implementation of acceptable measures for
the purpose of protection of the rights, freedoms and legitimate interests of the data sub-
ject, in cases where there is a direct consent of the data subject, or when this is necessary
for conclusion or execution of a contract between the data subject and the data controller.
Thus, in order to overcome the general ban on processing in the context of automated
decision-making, including the formation of a profile, it is sufficient, in fact, to introduce
an appropriate regulatory framework in the legislation of the EU member state. However,
the Regulation significantly limits abilities of the national legislator when it comes to for-
mation of a profile based on data concerning health.
As we can see, at this stage in the EU there is very detailed legal regulation in the
field of personal data processing, which forms a primary link for all digital services and
systems, as well as for other international systems of interaction that transmit information
between individuals and between different jurisdictions.
426 Вестник СПбГУ. Право. 2021. Т. 12. Вып. 2
2.2. Legal regulation of cross-border transfer of medical information in
the European Union
As mentioned above, the European Union has taken a number of significant steps
over the past few years to intensify the digitalization of healthcare in member states and
to create a united European digital circuit system that provides easy access to information
and the flow of electronic documents throughout the EU.
On April 25, 2018, European commissioners with reference to the mid-term review
on the implementation of the digital single market strategy6 indicated three areas of devel-
opment of the united digital circuit:
— citizens’ secure access to and sharing of health data across borders;
— better data to advance research, disease prevention and personalised health and
care;
— digital tools for citizen empowerment and person-centred care7.
As a next step, the European Commission presented a number of recommendations
to the EU member States on 6 February 20198. In support of the current need for digital
healthcare integration, Vice-President Andrus Ansip, in charge of the Digital Single Mar-
ket, pointed to requests from citizens to allow unhindered and full on-line access to medi-
cal information related to them, regardless of which state they are currently in9.
Currently, the exchange of data and the possibility of forming an electronic prescrip-
tion for cross-border application is already functioning between such states as Estonia,
Finland, Luxembourg, and the Czech Republic. By the end of 2021, 18 additional member
states should join10. It should be assumed that the speed and completeness of accession to
the European information exchange system will be largely dependent on internal social,
economic and organizational factors.
The provision of access to electronic databases containing data concerning health
within the framework of this system will take place between the EU member States in ac-
cordance with the provisions of the GDPR and, in particular, article 9 of the Regulation
(Article 9 of the Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of GDPR).
6 Communication from the commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Eco-
nomic and Social Committee and the Committee of the regions on the Mid-Term Review on the implemen-
tation of the Digital Single Market Strategy A Connected Digital Single Market for All. COM/2017/0228 fi-
nal society. EUR-Lex European Union law. Accessed July 18, 2019. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/
EN/TXT/?uri=COM%3A2017%3A228%3AFIN.
7 Communication from the commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Eco-
nomic and Social Committee and the Committee of the regions on enabling the digital transformation of
health and care in the Digital Single Market; empowering citizens and building a healthier society. 2018.
European Commission. Accessed July 18, 2019. https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/commu-
nication-enabling-digital-transformation-health-and-care-digital-single-market-empowering.
8 Press release. Commission makes it easier for citizens to access health data securely across borders,
Brussels (6 February 2019). European Commission. Accessed July 10, 2019. http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
release_IP-19-842_en.htm.
9 Ibid.
10 Communication from the commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European
Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the regions on enabling the digital transforma-
tion of health and care in the Digital Single Market; empowering citizens and building a healthier society.
2018. European Commission. Accessed July 18, 2019. https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/
communication-enabling-digital-transformation-health-and-care-digital-single-market-empowering
Вестник СПбГУ. Право. 2021. Т. 12. Вып. 2 427
At the same time, the EU’s goals, inspired by the need to implement the rights of the
EU citizens, will be achieved only in part. Thus, it can be assumed that in the coming years
the relocation of EU residents outside the EU and the number of cases that involve receiv-
ing medical care outside the EU will steadily increase, but the problem of cross-border
exchange of health data with third countries outside the EU remains unclear.
According to the analysis of the current European legal framework, in this case the
provisions of the Regulations regarding cross-border data transmission should be applied,
taking into account the provisions of article 9 of the above-mentioned normative act.
There are particular provisions of the Regulation which cover cross-border data
transfer: articles 44–50 of chapter V. Provisions of this chapter are based on the main rule
that data protection is transferred together with data. Thus, the provisions of article 44 of
Chapter V of the Regulation indicate that all the provisions of this Chapter should be ap-
plied to ensure that the level of protection of individuals guaranteed by the Regulation
remains unchanged.
According to the provisions of article 45 of Chapter V of the Regulation, cross-border
data transfer can take place, first of all, if there is a Decision on Compliance. To this date,
such Decisions were taken by the European Commission in respect to the following states:
Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Canada, Faroe Islands, Guernsey, Isle of Man, Israel, Jer-
sey, New Zealand, Switzerland, and Uruguay.
In the absence of a Decision on Compliance, data may be transferred only if the con-
troller or the data processor has provided appropriate safeguards and the data subjects
have legally protected rights and effective remedies (Article 46 of the Regulation (EU)
2016/679 of GDPR). Among such safeguards, a special place is held by legally binding
corporate rules (Article 47 of the Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of GDPR), including among
them binding on each member of a group of enterprises or a group of companies engaged
in joint economic activities, including their employees, and which in fact serve as a tool
for ensuring the transfer of data from the territory of the EU member state to other states
between enterprises of one group. At the same time, according to part 2 of article 15 of the
Regulation where personal data are transferred to a third country or to an international
organisation, the data subject shall have the right to be informed of the appropriate safe-
guards pursuant to Article 46 related to the transfer (Article 15 of the Regulation (EU)
2016/679 of GDPR).
In the absence of the European Commission’s Decision on Compliance and in the ab-
sence of the above guarantees, cross-border transfer of personal data may take place only
if one of the conditions provided for in § 1 article 49 of the Regulations is met. As already
mentioned above, with respect to special categories of personal data, the provisions of
article 49 of the Regulations shall be applied taking into account the provisions of article
9 of the said regulatory act.
Classic medical justification for partial derogation from the general prohibition on
cross-border data transfer lies in obtaining informed consent from the data subject (para-
graph a § 2 of article 49 of the Regulation (EU) 2016/679 GDPR). On the same basis, in ac-
cordance with paragraph a § 2 of article 9 of the Regulation, the processing of special cat-
egories of personal data, which include health data, is permitted. Accordingly, informed
consent from the data subject makes it possible to process information about their health
and to transmit it outside the state of residence, that is, cross-border. This provision is fully
consistent with the modern worldview of the rule of state law, recognizing and protecting
428 Вестник СПбГУ. Право. 2021. Т. 12. Вып. 2
the principle of autonomy of the individual, the priority of an individual’s and citizen’s
freedom of will. However, it should be noted that although the provisions of § 1 of article
49 of the Regulation do not provide for the possibility of a member state to restrict the
freedom of expression of will by the data subject, the relevant clause is available in § 2 of
article 9 of the Regulation, according to which the processing of health information is
possible if the data subject has given direct consent to the processing of personal data for
one or more of the established purposes, except for the cases when the legislation of the
Union or the EU member state provides that the prohibition specified in § 1 of article 9 of
the Regulation cannot be repealed by the data subject.
According to paragraph d § 1 of article 49 of the Regulation, it is possible to derogate
from the ban on cross-border data transfer if the transfer is necessary for reasons of public
interest. In order to understand the content of the concept “reasons of common interest”,
one should refer again to article 9 of the Regulation, according to which the process-
ing of special categories of personal data is not prohibited, if it is necessary for reasons
of special public interest on the basis of the legislation of the Union or the EU member
state, which should be proportionate to the goal and correspond to the essence of the
right to data protection and provide acceptable and specific measures to protect the basic
rights and interests of the data subject (paragraph g § 2 of article 9 of the Regulation (EU)
2016/679 GDPR). Data processing is also not prohibited in instances of public interest in
the field of public health, for example protection against serious cross-border threats to
health or to ensure high standards of quality and reliability of medical care and medicines
or medical equipment, on the basis of the legislation of the Union or the EU member state
that provides acceptable and specific measures to protect the rights and freedoms of the
data subject, in particular professional secrecy (paragraph g § 2 of article 9 of the Regula-
tion (EU) 2016/679 GDPR).
Another important reason for the healthcare sector to transfer data to third countries
and international organizations in accordance with article 49 of the Regulations is the fol-
lowing: the transfer is necessary to protect the vital interests of the data subject or other
persons, if the data subject is physically or legally unable to give consent. In accordance
with paragraph c § 2 of article 9 of the Regulation, processing is necessary to protect the
vital interests of the data subject or other natural persons, if the data subject is physically
or legally unable to provide his consent.
Accordingly, in emergency and urgent care situations in order to save the life or en-
sure the health of the patient, information can be transferred to a third country without
the consent of the data subject, if they are unable to give consent. At the same time, the
consent of the guarantor is not required, which greatly speeds up the decision-making
process and provides access to information without additional bureaucratic delays.
However, not all issues are fully resolved by the Regulation and other European docu-
ments. There are still controversial issues with the procedure in regard to the confirmation
of severity of the condition and individuals’ inability to express their will. This informa-
tion must be provided by the person requesting the information. Adequacy and validity of
the request should be assessed by the access provider.
In addition, as follows from the meaning of the analyzed regulations, the informa-
tion should be transmitted exactly to the extent that is required for immediate medical
decision making aimed at providing medical care in a particular clinical situation, and
it cannot be used for remote prediction and clinical decision-making. Accordingly, the
Вестник СПбГУ. Право. 2021. Т. 12. Вып. 2 429
European operator cannot provide access to the entire electronic medical card of the pa-
tient (hereinafter — EMC) upon this request. This is an additional difficulty, since the
doctor in this case should clearly formulate what specific data they need (drug allergy,
anamnestic information about kidney disease when deciding on a treatment for acute
renal failure, etc.). Consequently, the doctor may initially not have a comprehensive view
of what information they will need, which will lead to repeated requests, entailing an ex-
tremely undesirable time input.
At the same time, it is not unreasonable to assume that in the absence of a clearly
regulated procedure of cross-border interaction in the healthcare system, with insufficient
technical coordination of the interaction processes as well as in the absence of legal instru-
ments binding the involved persons on both sides of the border to interact and exchange
information provided for in paragraph f § 1 of article 49 and paragraph C § 2 of article 9 of
the Regulation, an option that allows to derogate from the general ban on the disclosure of
medical secrecy, in the vast majority of cases will not be implemented. This may adversely
affect the efficiency and promptness of medical care.
On the other hand, in the absence of a relevant international agreement, there is no
legal obligation to the requesting person in a foreign country or in an international or-
ganization to ensure the transfer of data obtained in the process of providing medical
care to the EMC of a patient — a resident of the EU. Possible consequences include the
incompleteness of information in the EMC or the absence of clinically relevant informa-
tion for subsequent observation and treatment. In particular, for the purposes of continu-
ity, information on the performed surgical intervention, on the features of anesthetic aid
and resuscitation assistance, on the drugs used, laboratory and instrumental data may be
extremely important.
Theoretically, there is still a problem of data compatibility in the case of various stan-
dards of formation and storage of digital information.
Thus, the European legislator, being motivated primarily by the aim of observing the
realization of human and civil rights and freedoms, adopts a normative act potentially ca-
pable of providing a legal basis for protection of rights in the context of new technological
challenges and, in particular, in the context of transition to the digital economy. However,
it seems that this act does not take into account all the nuances regarding such a socially
important sphere of relations as healthcare. The general conditions for cross-border data
transfer generally apply to special data categories. Priority is given to the principle of indi-
vidual autonomy and protection of the fundamental rights to life and health. But the data
subject is faced with a choice: to transfer medical data to a third jurisdiction and assume
all risks of improper storage or use of this data, or to disagree with the transfer and expose
themselves to risks of inadequate medical care. The state of residence does not provide the
data subject with the tools to protect data transferred.
In the current political environment, given the large number and diversity of states
and international organizations potentially able to engage in interaction and exchange of
medical data, it would be premature to assume the possibility of a permanent exchange.
Based on the above, it can be concluded that at this stage the EU has legal regulation
and technical capabilities for implementation of cross-border transfer of medical infor-
mation, which is appropriate in view of modern progressive globalization. Separately, of
course, we can note the lack of a single legal basis and the need for the formation of su-
pranational regulation, which will make it possible to create a more dynamic system of
430 Вестник СПбГУ. Право. 2021. Т. 12. Вып. 2
exchange of medical information. However, even the legal and technical tools that exist in
the EU presently, to some extent is sufficient to implement its main goal — the transfer of
significant medical information.
2.3. Legal regulation of personal data processing in the Russian Federation:
cross-border transfer of Private Health Information
Nowadays we see a gradual increase in the flow of tourists between the Russian Fed-
eration and the European Union, as well as an increase in the number of Russian citizens
who visit the European Union for medical care. Such movement of citizens to foreign
jurisdictions may sometimes, on a planned or urgent basis, require information on the
state of health of a person in the country of residence. This leads to the issue of cross-
border transfer of health data, which is becoming particularly relevant and requires the
development of legal mechanisms to facilitate this transfer within the framework of digital
healthcare.
In the Russian Federation, the fundamental normative legal act regulating the pro-
cessing of personal data is the Federal law of 27.07.2006 No. 152-FZ “On personal data”
(hereinafter — Law No. 152-FZ)11.
According to this act, medical data refers to special data (Article 10 of Law No. 152-
FZ). Processing of such data, as a general rule, is not allowed except as provided for in part
2 of article 10 of Law No. 152-FZ. The cases of processing specifically medical data are the
following:
— existence of consent from the personal data subject to the processing of their data
(paragraph 1 part 2 of article 10 of Law No.152-FZ);
— processing of personal data is necessary to protect the life, health or other vital
interests of the personal data subject or life, health or other vital interests of other
persons and obtainment of the consent of the personal data subject is not possible
(paragraph 3 part 2 of article 10 of the Law No. 152-FZ);
— processing of personal data is carried out for medical and preventive purposes, in
order to make a medical diagnosis, for provision of medical and medical-social
services, provided that the processing of personal data is carried out by a person
professionally engaged in medical activities and obliged in accordance with the
legislation of the Russian Federation to maintain medical confidentiality (para-
graph 4 part 2 of article 10 of Law No. 152-FZ).
Also, the main regulatory legal act regulating judicial relations in the field of public
health protection is the Federal law of 21.11.2011 No. 323-FZ “On the basics of public
health protection in the Russian Federation” (hereinafter — Law No. 323-FZ), which also
reflects the processing of personal data, namely medical data.
According to this law, medical data can be processed either with the consent of the
citizen (legal representative), and it should be written, or without their consent, in cases
established by the law, for example:
— for the purpose of medical examination and treatment of a citizen who as a re-
sult of their condition is not able to express their will, taking into account the
11 Here and below all references to Russian legal acts are given by “ConsultantPlus”. Accessed February
17, 2021. http://www.consultant.ru/document/cons_doc_LAW_61801.
Вестник СПбГУ. Право. 2021. Т. 12. Вып. 2 431
provisions of paragraph 1 of part 9 of article 20 of Law No. 323-FZ (provision of
medical assistance in emergency cases) (paragraph 1 part 4 of article 13 of Law
No. 323-FZ);
— in case of the threat of infectious diseases spreading, mass poisonings and injuries
(paragraph 2 of part 4 of article 13 of Law No. 323-FZ);
— in case of the exchange of information between medical organizations, including
those placed in medical information systems, in order to provide medical care,
taking into account the requirements of the legislation of the Russian Federation
on personal data (paragraph 8 of part 4 of article 13 of Law No. 323-FZ).
At the moment in the Russian Federation, the majority of medical documents are
submitted in paper form, however the tendency to further transition to electronic docu-
ments management is planned.
As a part of this transition, the Government of the Russian Federation adopted reso-
lution No. 555 of 5 May 2018 “On unified state information system in the field of health-
care”, which is a key act that is guiding Russian legislation in the field of healthcare towards
digitalization. This act defines the tasks, structure, order of management and access and
other provisions related to the unified state information system in the field of healthcare,
which should accumulate most of the medical information.
The main document containing data concerning the health of a citizen and other
information is the medical card of the patient receiving medical care on an outpatient ba-
sis12. This document contains private medical information. However, this is not the only
medical document that is used in medical organizations. For example, unified forms of
medical documentation are used in medical organizations that provide medical care on
an outpatient basis, and the procedures for their completion, are approved by the order of
the Ministry of healthcare of Russia of 15.12.2014 No. 834н.
The Order of the Ministry of healthcare of Russia of 29.06.2016 No. 425н (herein-
after — the order № 425н) contains an approval of the procedure of familiarization of
the patient (their legal representative) with medical documentation, which reflects the
patient’s state of health.
This order establishes that the patient (their legal representative) who wants to re-
ceive data concerning health, should send a written request, which should be answered
within 30 days from the date of registration of the written request13. The possibility to
send a request in electronic form is not clear. In our opinion, the opportunity of sending
a request in the form of an electronic document should be provided to the patient or their
legal representative, although this does not follow from the literal interpretation of order
No. 425н.
At the same time there is quite a long period for giving a response about the possibil-
ity or impossibility of familiarization with medical documentation; moreover, in view of
12 Order of the Ministry of healthcare and social development of the Russian Federation of November
22, 2004 No. 255 “On the procedure for the provision of primary healthcare to citizens entitled to a set of so-
cial services”. Order of the Ministry of healthcare of the Russian Federation of December 15, 2014 No. 834н
“On approval of unified forms of medical documentation used in medical organizations providing medical
care in outpatient settings and procedures for their filling”.
13 The Order of the Ministry of healthcare of Russia of 29.06.2016 No. 425н “On approval of the Pro-
cedure of familiarization of the patient or his legal representative with medical documentation, reflecting
the state of health of the patient”.
432 Вестник СПбГУ. Право. 2021. Т. 12. Вып. 2
the period of sending/receiving a request and response, any rapid transfer of information
without the use of electronic means of communication is not possible.
Based on the above, in this case there is a gap in the legislation. As a result, it is nec-
essary to supplement order No. 425н with provisions about the possibility of sending a
request for provision of medical documents for review in electronic form.
The amendments made to part 5 of article 22 of the Law No. 323-FZ clearly show
the orientation of the legislator to digitalization of medical documentation. Thus, in par-
ticular, it is established that the request for provision of medical documents (copies) and
extracts from them, reflecting the patient’s state of health, can be sent in electronic form.
However, to date, the procedure and terms for provision of medical documents (cop-
ies) and extracts were not approved by the authorized federal executive body of Russia
(Part 5 of article 22 of Law No. 323-FZ). It should be noted that the Order of the Ministry
of healthcare and social development of Russia of 02.05.2012 No. 441н approved the pro-
cedure for issuing certificates and medical reports.
The Draft Order of the Ministry of healthcare of the Russian Federation “On approval
of the procedure and terms for provision of medical documents (copies) and extracts from
them”14. This Draft provides that a request for information may be sent using an amplified
qualified electronic signature or a simple electronic signature through the use of a single
system of identification and authentication. The deadline for submission of the requested
information is 30 calendar days.
The draft regulatory act that submission of copies of medical documents and extracts
from them in the form of electronic documents is allowed only under the following condi-
tions: information about the authorized responsible employee of the medical organization
(who sends the specified documents with use of the amplified qualified electronic signa-
ture) shall be entered into the federal register of medical employees, on the condition of
registration of the relevant medical organizations in the federal register of medical organi-
zations of the unified state information system in the field of healthcare15.
Also, the draft defines a list of medical documents that are not provided in the origi-
nal to the patient or their legal representative (only their copy or extracts from them), for
example, the history of a child’s development, the history of childbirth, the medical card
of a dental patient, etc. (paragraph 4 of the Project).
Thus, the citizen (their legal representative) has the right to receive duly certified
medical documents (both in paper and electronic form), copies of medical documents or
extracts from them in the manner prescribed by the law.
Nevertheless, we would like to emphasize the rather long-term process of providing
the required information (its request, response to the request and actual receipt); more-
over, there are nuances in the transfer of information in electronic form. We would also
like to note that the grounds for refusal to provide documents are not defined, thus, the
powers of the medical organization are quite broad. For example, a medical organization
has the right to refuse to provide medical information if it has doubts on authenticity of
the signature of the personal data subject16.
14 Draft Order of the Ministry of healthcare of the Russian Federation “On approval of the procedure
and terms for provision of medical documents (copies) and extracts from them”.
15 Resolution of the Government of the Russian Federation of May 5, 2018 No. 555 “On the unified
state information system in the field of healthcare”.
16 The Ruling on the appeal of the Investigative committee for civil cases of the Krasnoyarsk regional
Вестник СПбГУ. Право. 2021. Т. 12. Вып. 2 433
Therefore, we believe that the legal act should establish a specific list of grounds for
refusal to provide medical information, since in this case, the medical organization is giv-
en an opportunity to make a decision at its discretion.
As already mentioned, in the Russian Federation most medical data is presented in
paper form, but there is a trend towards further digitalization of the data. In particular, the
Russian Federation has adopted and implemented GOST R 52636-2006 Electronic medi-
cal records. General provisions (amended)17.
This document defines such concepts as personal medical record, electronic medical
history, electronic personal medical record, electronic medical archive.
It defines the life cycle (maintenance and subsequent archiving) of electronic per-
sonal health records (further — EPHR). Regarding the transfer of medical record copies
using electronic communication channels, it states that this action is allowed, however the
“Security policy” of the medical organization should state the following:
— the procedure for transmission of electronic copies of EPHR to patients, the meth-
od of registration of transfer of copies and notification of patients about the rules of
confidentiality of personal medical data; the recommendation says that it is neces-
sary to develop a checklist for patients on how to use electronic copies of EPHR;
— the procedure for transfer of electronic copies of EPHR to independent and parent
organizations, requests for copies, the method of registration of transfer of copies
and documents being the basis for such transfer.
It is established that a cover letter to the document containing EPHR should be in-
structions on how to access EPHR.
Thus, most of the information that should be stated in the “Security policy” of the
medical organization is left to the discretion of the organization. This results in a lack of
uniform rules and, in some organizations, a complete lack of them.
In our opinion, the “Standard security policy” of a medical organization should be
developed, which should reflect key stages of medical data transmission.
Transition to electronic document management, of course, simplifies the process of
personal data processing. However, in practice, there are often difficulties with the trans-
fer of medical data to medical organizations abroad.
Article 12 of Law 152-FZ establishes that cross-border transfer of personal data is
possible if:
— the parties are parties to the Convention for the Protection of Individuals with re-
gard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data18 — ratification of this Convention
by the parties involved in the personal data processing;
— the state where it is planned to transfer personal data to provides an adequate pro-
tection of the rights of personal data subjects, which is carried out in accordance
with Law 152-FZ.
What is the difficulty?
court of October 1, 2014, case No. 33-9443/2014.
17 GOST R 52636-2006 Electronic medical history. General provisions (amended). Accessed June 2,
2019. http://docs.cntd.ru/document/1200048924.
18 The Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal
Data (Made in Strasbourg on 28.01.1981). 2014. April. Bulletin of international treaties 4: 1–9.
434 Вестник СПбГУ. Право. 2021. Т. 12. Вып. 2
First, prior to the transfer of personal data, the operator (the person transferring per-
sonal data) must ensure that the rights of personal data subjects are adequately protected
in the foreign state to which the transfer of personal data is planned.
The procedure for verification of adequate protection of the rights of personal data
subjects remains uncertain.
On the one hand, accession to the Convention on protection of natural persons at
the automated processing of personal data essentially means that the state provides data
protection from a formal point of view.
On the other hand, the list of foreign states that are not parties to the Convention of
the Council of Europe on the protection of individuals in the automated processing of per-
sonal data, but which provide adequate protection of the rights of personal data subjects,
is approved by the decree of Roskomnadzor dated 15.03.2013 No. 27419.
According to the explanations of Roskomnadzor, for the purpose of inclusion of the
state into this list it is necessary to comply with the following conditions in a foreign coun-
try: presence of a normative legal act regulating the sphere of personal data, the presence
of an authorized body for protection of the rights of personal data subjects and a system of
sanctions provided for violation of the legal requirements in this field20.
Thus, before the transfer of personal data, the operator should make sure that the
country to which the transfer of personal data is planned is included in these two lists.
Part 4 of article 12 of Law 152-FZ defines the cases when the transfer of personal
data can also be carried out to other persons who do not provide adequate protection
of personal data. In particular, such a transfer is possible with the written consent of the
personal data subject, performance of the contract to which the personal data subject is a
party, as well as for the protection of life, health and other vital interests of personal data
subjects, in case of the impossibility of obtaining consent in writing.
Some authors say that there is a problem of insecurity of the rights of the personal
data subject when sending their personal data to a state in which there is no adequate pro-
tection of personal data, if the subject is a party to the contract (Kucherenko 2009). This
is explained by the fact that according to article 430 of the Civil code, the contract can be
concluded for a third party (personal data subject).
We would also like to consider such a case of processing of special personal data
provided for in paragraph 4 of part 2 of article 10 of Law No. 152-FZ as the processing of
personal data for medical and preventive purposes. Data is processed in order to establish
a medical diagnosis, the provision of medical and medical and social services, provided
that the processing of personal data is carried out by a person professionally engaged in
medical activities and obliged in accordance with the legislation of the Russian Federation
to maintain medical secrecy.
In this case, special requirements for the person processing personal data are estab-
lished: professional medical activity and obligation to maintain medical secrecy in ac-
cordance with the legislation of the Russian Federation. At the same time, article 12 of
19 Decree of Roskomnadzor (Federal Service for Supervision of Communication, Information
Technology and Mass Media) of 15.03.2013 No. 274 “On approval of the list of the foreign states which are
not parties to the Convention of the Council of Europe on protection of physical persons at the automated
processing of personal data and providing adequate protection of the rights of personal data subjects”.
20 “Updated list of countries providing adequate protection of the rights of personal data subjects”.
2019. Roskomnadzor. Accessed June 8, 2019. https://rkn.gov.ru/news/rsoc/news65616.htm. (In Russian)
Вестник СПбГУ. Право. 2021. Т. 12. Вып. 2 435
Law No. 323-FZ establishes a fairly wide list of persons who are obliged to keep medical
confidentiality: these are the persons, who received the information at training, execution
of labor duties, office duties, job duties and other responsibilities. However, Law No. 323-
FZ regulates legal relations arising in the sphere of public health protection in the Russian
Federation. In the vast majority of countries, persons engaged in professional medical
activities are obliged by their national legislation to maintain medical secrecy. We believe
that the rules provided for in paragraph 4 of part 2 of article 10 of Law No. 152-FZ apply
only to the primary processing of personal data, which is carried out by a Russian medical
organization, since the internal legislation of the state operates exclusively in the territory
of this state and does not apply to non-residents of the state who are in the territory of
another state.
Thus, there are no special restrictions on the cross-border transfer of personal data
(including medical data) in Law 152-FZ; in the case of written consent or a contract to
which the personal data subject is a party, personal data may be sent to a foreign state that
does not provide protection of personal data (there are no advantages and no simplified
procedure for transferring data to countries that provide adequate protection of personal
data). That is, in fact, the transfer of personal data is allowed to any country of the world.
Second, in any case, the operator is obliged to notify the body authorized for the
protection of the rights of personal data subjects (Roskomnadzor) on the cross-border
transfer of personal data (Article 22 of Law 152-FZ).
In paragraph 3.1.11 of the Order of Roskomnadzor dated 30.05.2017 No. 94 “On ap-
proval of methodological recommendations on notification of the authorized body on the
beginning of processing of personal data and on amendments to the previously submitted
information”, it is stated that the notification on processing of personal data should indi-
cate the specific state to which the transfer of personal data will be carried out.
In addition to notifying Roskomnadzor, the operator is also required to notify the
subject of personal data about such a transfer.
Third, also, in the case of transferring personal data via the Internet, the operator can
use only encryption facilities certified by the Russian Federal security service (and data
of encryption facilities should only be of domestic production, there are features of the
turnover of such means, which do not simplify the process of transferring personal data).
The operator is obliged to provide protection to the data transmission channel. That is, for
example, the transfer of medical personal data via e-mail without the use of cryptographic
protection of information will be a fact of disclosure of personal data and a violation of the
requirements for personal data protection.
Fourth, the procedure for cross-border transfer of personal data should also be stated
in the local legal acts of the data operator, as mentioned earlier.
The following provision set out in the work entitled “Safety of storage and trans-
fer of medical (personal) data in the multilateral exchange of medical information” for
the “International Space Station” program is particularly interesting: “one of the forms of
regulation of cross-border transfer of personal data is an existence of a written agreement
containing the requirements agreed by the parties for the purpose of protection of person-
al data at their cross-border transfer” (Shulenin, Skorokhodov, Kantemirova 2012). The
presence of such a document would significantly simplify the procedure of cross-border
transfer of personal data, but such agreements only seem appropriate in the presence of
personalized and permanent participants of cross-border transfer of personal data. In our
436 Вестник СПбГУ. Право. 2021. Т. 12. Вып. 2
case, a medical organization often acts as an intermediary between a patient and a foreign
medical organization.
Thus, the mechanism of cross-border transfer of personal data is quite complicated,
and yet it should protect the transferred personal data from intruders.
In part, this issue was also addressed in a number of other works (Serafimov 2018;
Sokolova 2019; Kheifets, Kheifets 2020; Hartley 2014; Horspool, Humphreys, Wells-Greco
2018).
Also, after adoption of the Federal law of 21.07.2014 No. 242-FZ “On amendments
to certain legislative acts of the Russian Federation in terms of clarifying the procedure
for processing of personal data in information and telecommunication networks” (here-
inafter — Law No. 242-FZ), one of the topical issues was the question of the possibility
of cross-border transfer of personal data, since the above-mentioned law establishes the
obligation of the data operator to process personal data using databases located on the
territory of the Russian Federation (and cross-border data transfer involves the transfer of
data to the territory of a foreign state, whose databases are not in Russia).
An answer to this question was provided in the explanations of the Ministry of digital
development, communications and mass media of the Russian Federation21, which states
that the adoption of Law No. 242-FZ in no way affected the cross-border transfer of data,
since personal data before the transfer to a foreign person is initially entered into a da-
tabase located on the territory of Russia (“primary database”), and then transferred to a
foreign person for inclusion into a “secondary database”.
As already mentioned, the main international document containing legally binding
rules for Russia in the field of cross-border transfer of personal data is the Convention on
the protection of individuals in the automated processing of personal data (hereinafter —
the Convention).
Article 14 of the Convention is noteworthy as it states that if a person is a citizen of
another state, permanently residing in the territory of a foreign state, they have the right
to request the required information through the authorized body in the state in which he
lives, from the state of which he is a citizen. The body to which the request for such in-
formation is sent must assist in obtaining it (refusal is only possible in the circumstances
defined in article 16 of the Convention, for example, if the execution of the request would
violate the sovereignty, security of the state). Article 17 stipulates that the forms, proce-
dures and languages used in cross-border transfers shall be determined directly between
the states concerned. However, such agreements between the Russian Federation and an-
other state were not found during the analysis. At the same time, the status of persons who
temporarily reside in the territory of a foreign state are not defined in the Convention.
It should be noted that there is a tendency to develop international legal acts by par-
ticipants of various international associations.
The Resolution of the Interparliamentary Assembly of Member Nations of the Com-
monwealth of Independent States (hereinafter — CIS) of November 25, 2016 No. 45-
13 “On the model law ‘On cross-border information exchange of electronic documents’”
(hereinafter — the model law) serves as the basis for legal support in the cross-border
exchange of information by CIS members and the harmonization of national legislation
(Part 4 of article 1 of the model law). Part 2 of article 3 of the model law defines that the
21 Processing and storage of personal data in the Russian Federation. Amendments since September
1, 2015. Accessed June 9, 2019. https://digital.gov.ru/ru/personaldata.
Вестник СПбГУ. Право. 2021. Т. 12. Вып. 2 437
CIS Member Nations create an interstate coordinating body, which defines the rules and
requirements for documentation in cross-border information exchange. At the same time,
part 3 of article 4 of the model law states that the cross-border transfer of personal data is
regulated by the national legislation of the states. This document establishes the need to
develop a cross-border space of trust (Article 11 of the model law).
Similar rules on the creation of a cross-border space of trust are stated in part 1 of ar-
ticle 23 of the Treaty on Eurasian Economic Union22 — another international organization.
In its turn, the requirements for creation, development and operation of the cross-
border space of trust are determined by the decision of the Council of the Eurasian Eco-
nomic Commission dated 05.12.2018 No. 96 “On the requirements for creation, develop-
ment and operation of the cross-border space of trust”.
Thus, there is an active development of the regulatory framework for cross-border
data transfer, including the transfer of medical data. However, only basic documents that
define the main provisions of cross-border data transmission are being created, while
there is no detailed regulation in specific areas of public life.
The experience of another international association — the European Union — also
seems relevant. In June 2019, the first session of the trans-border transfer of medical data
was held, information about this was published on the website of the European Commis-
sion23. Information provided states that now a doctor from Luxembourg can obtain the
electronic medical history of a traveler who came from the Czech Republic, in particular
about allergies, surgical operations, etc. This is information that may be needed in case
emergency medical care and it is now available in electronic form. Also, in the framework
of eHealth there is a system of the electronic exchange of prescriptions, for example, now
citizens of the Republic of Finland can get medicines from Croatia that they were pre-
scribed by a Finnish doctor.
In the Russian Federation and partner countries (CIS, Eurasian Union), the specified
legal framework is just beginning to be developed. Work on this is of a general nature and
not divided into certain areas (which is likely to happen in the future).
In view of the dynamic development of the legal framework of the Russian Federation
in terms of digitalization of healthcare, we believe that after the completion of the forma-
tion of a state system in the field of healthcare, it will be necessary to amend the decree of
the Government of the Russian Federation of May 5, 2018 No. 555 “On the unified state
information system in the field of healthcare” in order to regulate the implementation of
cross-border transfer of medical data.
The active legal regulation of cross-border data transmission and accompanying de-
velopment and creation of information systems will allow for inter-state data transmis-
sion, fundamentally transform social institutions, simplify many procedures for ordinary
citizens, which will provide better health services, and ultimately lead to better lives for
many people, regardless of their place of residence and citizenship.
22 Treaty on Eurasian Economic Union (Signed in Astana on 29.05.2014). Accessed June 9, 2019.
https://www.un.org/en/ga/sixth/70/docs/treaty_on_eeu.pdf.
23 “Daily News 21/06/2019”. 2019. European Commission. Accessed June 23, 2019. http://europa.eu/
rapid/press-release_MEX-19-3351_en.htm.
438 Вестник СПбГУ. Право. 2021. Т. 12. Вып. 2
3. Conclusions
As a result of the analysis, it can be concluded that within the framework of European
and Russian legislation at this stage there is comparability in the protection of medical
data in the context of digital medicine. Also, there are certain differences in approaches to
the regulation of rights of health data subjects in the framework of the national e-health
systems. However, these differences are not final as the Russian legal regulation is still in
the stage of dynamic formation, and its final form is unknown at the moment. Neverthe-
less, the Russian legislator has already determined the vector for development of legal
regulation, and it is unlikely to change.
In regard to legal regulation of health data transfer to third countries, both the Rus-
sian Federation and the European Union have chosen the way of severe restrictive regula-
tion and introduction of a closed list of grounds for overcoming the ban on cross-border
transfer. The restrictive approach can be justified both by the public interest and the need
to ensure the observance of individual rights of citizens to privacy, while the ratio of indi-
vidualization of situations where the transfer of medical data is permissible, as a rule, lies
in significant public interest that can prevail over individual risks of violation of the rights
of data subjects. However, both in the EU and in the Russian Federation data transmission
is legally permitted in cases where it is necessary to save the life or health of individuals,
as well as in situations where the data subjects themselves give informed consent to their
transfer. At this stage the states permitting the transfer decline all responsibility for what
happens further, both with respect to the de facto execution of the data exchange proce-
dure and its timing, and with respect to the further handling of the transferred data if the
transfer, as such, has taken place.
In this regard, it seems timely and extremely urgent to provide for the possibility of
concluding an international agreement on the exchange of medical data in digital format,
the participants of which potentially should be, first of all, the EU member states, the
EAEU, China, and the countries of the American continent.
The supranational system formed within the framework of this agreement should
solve the following tasks:
— ensure compatibility of national and international digital healthcare systems;
— provide legal and technical mechanisms for transmission and protection of health
data;
— provide conditions for international cooperation on issues of electronic data secu-
rity and combating cybercrime.
At the same time, the basis for the obligation to request and provide access to infor-
mation, respectively, should be the principles of the maximum enforcement of the right
to life and health, the right to private life, the principle of individual autonomy, as well
as public interests in the field of public health, such as the threat of infectious diseases
spreading, etc.
Accordingly, the proposed supranational system should essentially represent a legal
and technical basis covering the maximum possible geographical space. In other words,
the system should be a permanent mechanism in stand-by mode, whose individual links
should be included and interact only on clearly defined grounds:
— threat to the life or health of the data subject or other persons if the consent of the
data subject cannot be obtained;
Вестник СПбГУ. Право. 2021. Т. 12. Вып. 2 439
— informed consent of the data subject or its representative;
— public interests in the field of public health in the threat of infectious diseases
spreading, mass poisoning and damage;
— international cooperation in the fight against crime;
— additional grounds, in our view, could be included within the framework of bilat-
eral agreements between the states and organizations.
Also, in light of potential expansion of the number of states that accede to the pro-
posed agreement and, as a consequence, the potential for a significant difference in the
constitutional structure of the states concerned and in the different approaches to the ap-
plication of international normative regulation, the proposed agreement on international
electronic cooperation in the field of healthcare should provide for provisions binding the
signatory and acceding states to implement the provisions of the agreement into national
legislation. The agreement should also provide in national systems of law the rules of legal
responsibility of natural and legal persons for violation of the provisions of the proposed
agreement.
References
Cataleta, Anna, Alessandro Longo, Raffaella Natale. 2020. “GDPR, tutto ciò che c’è da sapere per essere
in regola”. Digital 360. Accessed May 26, 2018. https://www.agendadigitale.eu/cittadinanza-digitale/
gdpr-tutto-cio-che-ce-da-sapere-per-essere-preparati.
Hartley, Trevor. 2014. The Foundations of European Union Law: An Introduction to the Constitutional and
Administrative Law of European Union. New York, Oxford University Press.
Horspool, Margot, Matthew Humphreys, Michael Wells-Greco. 2018. European Union Law. 10th ed. Oxford,
Oxford University Press.
Kheifets, Nikolay E., Evgeny N. Kheifets. 2020. “Human rights in the aspect of doctor-patient relations in the
era of e-health. Part 1. European practice of legal regulation of relations related to the handling of spe-
cial personal data”. Voprosy organizatsii i informatizatsii zdravookhraneniia 1 (102): 10–29. (In Russian)
Kucherenko, Anna V. 2009. “On guarantees of the rights of subjects at implementation of cross-border
transfer of personal data”. Information law 3: 14–17. (In Russian)
Serafimov, Victor. 2018. “Extraterritorial application of the EU general DATA protection regulation”. Kutafin
University Law Review 5 (2) (10): 469–479. https://doi.org/10.17803/2313-5395.2018.2.10.469–479.
Shulenin, Anatoly P., Skorokhodov Anton V., Kantemirova Ekaterina V. 2012. “Security storage and trans-
mission of medical (personal) data for the multilateral exchange of medical information in frame of
the program ‘The International Space Station’”. Trudy 14-i Vserossiiskoi nauchnoi konferentsii “Elek-
tronnye biblioteki: perspektivnye metody i tekhnologii, elektronnye kollektsii” — RCDL-2012, Pereslavl’-
Zalesskii, Rossiia, 15–18 oktiabria 2012 g. Accessed June 6, 2019. http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-934/paper50.
pdf. (In Russian)
Sokolova, Marianna E. 2019. “Between business interests and security: American it giants and personal
data protection”. Rossiia i Amerika v XXI veke 2: 6. https://doi.org/10.18254/S207054760006015-3. (In
Russian)
Received: November 12, 2020
Accepted: March 15, 2021
Authors’ information:
Igor M. Akulin — Dr. Sci. in Medicine, Professor; akulinim@yandex.ru
Ekaterina A. Chesnokova — PhD in Medicine, Associate Professor; e.chesnokova.spbu@mail.ru
Umberto Genovese — MD, Associate Professor; umberto.genovese@unimi.it
Roman A. Presnyakov — LLM; r.presnyakov@inbox.ru
Anastasia E. Pryadko — LLM; anastasiis.pr@yandex.ru
440 Вестник СПбГУ. Право. 2021. Т. 12. Вып. 2