Online-Journals.org
JOE International Journal of
Online and Biomedical Engineering
iJOE | eISSN: 2626-8493 | Vol. 20 No. 9 (2024) |
https://doi.org/10.3991/ijoe.v20i09.48475
PAPER
EEG-Based Control of a 3D-Printed Upper Limb
Exoskeleton for Stroke Rehabilitation
Saad M. Sarhan1(), ABSTRACT
Mohammed Z. Al-Faiz2, Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) have emerged as transformative tools for translating users’
Ayad M. Takhakh3 neural signals into commands for external devices. The urgent need for innovative treat-
ments to enhance upper limb motor function in stroke survivors is underscored by the limita-
1Department of Biomedical
tions of traditional rehabilitation methods. The development of communication and control
Engineering, College of
technology for individuals with severe neuromuscular diseases, particularly stroke patients, is
Engineering, Al-Nahrain
centered on utilizing electroencephalographic (EEG) signals to accurately decode users’ inten-
University, Baghdad, Iraq
tions and operate external devices. Two healthy subjects and a stroke patient were enrolled to
2Department of Systems acquire EEG signals using the EMOTIV EPOC+ sensor. The experimental procedure involved
Engineering, College of recording five actions for both motor imagery and facial expression signals to control the
Information Engineering, 3D-printed upper limb exoskeleton. EEGLAB and BCILAB software were used for preprocess-
Al-Nahrain University, ing and classification. The results showed successful EEG-based control of the exoskeleton,
Baghdad, Iraq representing a significant advancement in assistive technology for individuals with motor
impairments. The support vector machine (SVM) classifier achieved higher accuracy in both
3Department of Mechanical
offline and online modes for both motor imaginary and facial expression tasks. The conclu-
Engineering, College of
sion highlights the appropriateness of using EEGLAB for offline EEG data analysis and BCILAB
Engineering, Al-Nahrain
for both offline and online analysis and classification. The integration of servo motors in the
University, Baghdad, Iraq
exoskeleton, allowing movements in five Degrees of Freedom (DOF), positions it as an effec-
st.saad.m.sarhan@ced. tive rehabilitation solution for individuals with upper limb impairments.
nahrainuniv.edu.iq
KEYWORDS
brain-computer interfaces (BCIs), rehabilitation, exoskeleton, electroencephalographic (EEG)
1 INTRODUCTION
Systems known as BCIs translate users’ intentions from the central nervous system
to external devices [1]. With a better understanding of the functioning of the brain,
the introduction of effective low-cost computer equipment, and the recognition of
the requirements and potentials of individuals with disabilities, the current focus of
BCI research is on creating new technologies for augmentative communication and
Sarhan, S.M., Al-Faiz, M.Z., Takhakh, A.M. (2024). EEG-Based Control of a 3D-Printed Upper Limb Exoskeleton for Stroke Rehabilitation. International
Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE), 20(9), pp. 99–112. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijoe.v20i09.48475
Article submitted 2024-02-09. Revision uploaded 2024-03-24. Final acceptance 2024-03-24.
© 2024 by the authors of this article. Published under CC-BY.
iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 9 (2024) International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) 99
Sarhan et al.
control that will help people with severe neuromuscular illnesses such as spinal cord
damage, brainstem stroke, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Modern BCIs derive the
user’s intent from a range of electrophysiological signals such as EEG, ECoG, and so on.
Examples of these signals include mu or beta rhythms, P300 potentials, slow corti-
cal potentials, and cortical neuronal activity recorded by implanted electrodes. They
are instantly converted into commands that control a computer display or another
device [2, 3]. In particular, over the past ten years, BCI interventions have been inves-
tigated as treatments to enhance stroke patients’ recovery of their upper limb motor
function [4, 5]. The fact that patients may still operate a BCI while having damaged
brain tissue is one of the key factors contributing to the increased interest in BCI for
stroke rehabilitation. Additionally, the development of innovative treatments is a top
priority to alleviate the strain on healthcare systems, as stroke is one of the leading
causes of motor disability worldwide [6, 7]. It has been demonstrated that rehabilita-
tion helps stroke victims regain specific motor skills. It is not difficult to regain some
range of motion in the shoulder and elbow through effective and intense rehabilita-
tion training, according to several clinically controlled investigations. The rehabilita-
tion of severely paretic wrist and finger control, which sometimes hinders patients
from rejoining their families and society, is difficult to improve. Therefore, there is an
urgent need to look for innovative treatments to enhance. The motor function of the
upper limb. Patients with stroke often experience profound and superficial sensory
abnormalities [8, 9]. According to studies, enhancing sensory output and input while
exercising may be crucial for the recovery of motor impairments because it encour-
ages the rehabilitation of sensory impairments [10]. The potential for advancements
in the field of stroke rehabilitation in the future is believed to be inherent in EEG-
controlled exoskeletons, a cutting-edge technology [11]. Either the scalp’s surface or
the cortical surface directly provides the brain with signals that indicate the overall
electrophysiological activity of the brain’s nerve cells. It is a neuronal voltage fluctu-
ation that can indicate changes in several physiological states [12]. There are three
different approaches for recording the electrical activity of the brain: two of them
are invasive (ECoG and intracortical recordings), and one is non-invasive (EEG) [13].
The signal is stronger and has a higher amplitude in the invasive methods com-
pared to the non-invasive ones, which results in more accurate data. The issue is
that obtaining these signals often involves risky, costly, and complex surgery. One
of the primary shortcomings of the invasive method is that it can only be used for
a very limited time before it needs to be withdrawn because it can damage nearby
tissue [14]. The most widely used BCI systems are non-invasive because they do not
need to be implanted, and their use is neither challenging nor dangerous [15]. The
purpose of this work is to explore and develop BCIs as transformative tools for trans-
lating neural signals into commands for external devices. The focus is specifically
on addressing the urgent need for innovative treatments to improve upper limb
motor function in stroke survivors, taking into account the limitations of traditional
rehabilitation methods. The research emphasizes the development of augmentative
communication and control technologies, particularly for individuals with severe
neuromuscular disorders, with a specific focus on stroke patients. The study utilizes
EEG signals to effectively decode users’ intentions and control a 3D-printed upper
limb exoskeleton. The experimental procedure involved recording actions related
to both motor imagery and facial expression signals. Ultimately, integrating servo
motors into the exoskeleton to enable movements in five DOFs positions it as an
effective rehabilitation solution for individuals with upper limb impairments. The
work contributes to the advancement of BCIs and their application in providing
enhanced rehabilitation solutions for individuals with motor impairments, particu-
larly those with upper limb disabilities like stroke survivors.
100 International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 9 (2024)
EEG-Based Control of a 3D-Printed Upper Limb Exoskeleton for Stroke Rehabilitation
1.1 Principles of brain-computer interfaces
A BCI consists of several crucial components, such as an input mechanism, usu-
ally based on the user’s electrophysiological activity; an output system that conveys
instructions to the connected device; intermediary elements that convert input sig-
nals into actionable output commands; and a structured protocol that governs the
timing, methodology, and instances of operation and non-operation. The interaction
between the user and the system’s adaptive controllers is crucial for the successful
operation of BCI. BCI must identify and extract user-controllable features and then
precisely and efficiently translate those characteristics into device commands. These
components and their primary interactions are illustrated in Figure 1 [1].
Fig. 1. Basic design and operation of a BCI system [1]
EEG activity can be examined and measured in two different ways: voltage ver-
sus time and voltage or power versus frequency. EEG-based communication can
take advantage of either type of analysis. Additionally, research has shown that indi-
viduals can influence certain EEG characteristics, leading to EEG signals becoming
more prevalent than other types of BCIs [16].
2 MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1 Participants
Two healthy subjects and one stroke patient were recruited as participants in
the study, and each of them completed EEG recording sessions under controlled
conditions.
2.2 EEG signal acquisition and processing
EMOTIV EPOC+ sensor. According to the international 10–20 system, a reason-
ably priced, commercially accessible 14-channel EEG EMOTIV EPOC+ Neuroheadset
iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 9 (2024) International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) 101
Sarhan et al.
(see Figure 2A) was utilized to collect raw data from electrodes placed at F3, FC5,
AF3, F7, T7, P7, O1, O2, P8, T8, F8, AF4, FC6, and F4 positions, in conjunction with two
reference electrodes (CMS, DRL), and a gyroscope that provides information about
head movements (see Figure 2B).
Fig. 2. (A) EMOTIV EPOC+ sensor, and (B) Electrodes locations for motor imaginary and facial
expressions of EMOTIV headset based on 10/20 international system
The sensor includes effective classifiers to recognize a variety of facial emotions,
such as blinking, left and right winks, raised eyebrows, frowns, smiles, and clenched
teeth. Since the headset uses Bluetooth to connect to PCs or other microcontroller
devices, it offers greater mobility. The maximum sampling frequency is 128 Hz.
All of the EMOTIV EPOC+ headset’s standard accessible electrodes were used in this
experimental investigation. The signal quality can be improved by using conductive
media, such as saline solutions, to reduce impedance and enhance contact quality.
Real-time impedance monitoring is possible with the impedance monitoring pro-
gram included in the EMOTIV EPOC+ headset.
Experimental procedure. The EEG data was obtained using a 14-channel
EMOTIV EPOC headset, which was programmed with EmotivPRO and connected
to third-party programs (MATLAB Simulink and Emokey) for acquiring motor
imagery and facial expression signals within specific paradigms. These signals
were then used as input signals for the exoskeleton actuators. EmotivPRO is an
Emotiv application used to analyze the output from their EEG headset. It allows
users to practice mental commands to operate machines using their minds. It also
enables users to examine real-time performance metrics, facial expressions, and
motion sensor data streams from their headsets. The first step in properly con-
figuring the EmotivPRO is to place it in the correct position. To do so, verify the
reference sensors. If they are green, the position is correct, and it is safe. Each day,
three runs were collected during the training data collection. Each run includes
five different trials (files) of eight seconds for each case of motor imagery (by
visualizing the cubic status: fixed, pull, move left, right, and push) task record-
ings. In addition, three runs were recorded per day, with each run containing five
unique trials (files) of eight seconds for five different facial expressions (frown,
clenched teeth, left and right eye blink, and eyes closed). The overall data size
for each subject was 15,360 samples for motor imagery and 15,360 samples for
facial expressions, calculated as follows: 3 runs × 5 trials × 8 seconds × 128 sam-
pling rates for each day. The data recording process took five days for each per-
son. During the acquisition process, EmotivPRO presents unique images for each
instance of motor imagination and facial expression. These images are shown
to the subject after giving them specific instructions at a designated time for a
102 International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 9 (2024)
EEG-Based Control of a 3D-Printed Upper Limb Exoskeleton for Stroke Rehabilitation
set duration, guiding them on the tasks to perform in the depicted sequence, as
illustrated in Figure 3.
Fig. 3. Experimental protocol for each trial of (A) Motor imaginary, (B) Facial expressions
Motor imaginary signals were used to move the exoskeleton, while facial expres-
sions were utilized to determine which method had the highest accuracy. Every facial
expression or motor imagery action corresponds to a movement in the exoskeleton,
as illustrated in Table 1.
Table 1. Shows face expressions and motor imaginary actions with corresponding exoskeleton movements
Facial
expressions
Motor
imaginary
actions
Desired Hand flexion Hand abduction Elbow flexion Shoulder Shoulder
exoskeleton and extension and adduction and extension flexion abduction
movement and extension and adduction
Facial expressions and motor imagery signals were used to control the exoskele-
ton, as detailed in Table 1 and described below:
• Furrow brows; or, the cube does not move = Hand flexion or extension
• Clenched teeth; or, the cube is approaching = Hand abduction or adduction
• Left eye blink; or, the cube is moving right = Elbow flexion or extension
• Right eye blink; or, the cube is moving left = Shoulder flexion or extension
• Eyes closed; or, the cube is moving away = Shoulder abduction or adduction
iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 9 (2024) International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) 103
Sarhan et al.
When the setup is finished, the main EmotivPRO window displays, which is sep-
arated into two sections.
• The section on facial expressions will capture brain signals and train expressions
such as smiling, smirking left or right, frowning, and so on. By selecting the live mode,
a face model replicates the facial expressions made in real life. A user must configure
the EEG sensor correctly and start training an expression in the training window.
• The section on mental commands involves training and tracking signals of con-
centration, relaxation, stress, and motor imagery. The system is designed to learn
and recognize the user’s baseline mental state or neutral condition by capturing a
short period of their brain patterns when they are not actively trying to give any
commands. Then, training a new mental command is as simple as selecting the
correct command label in the training mode. Next, envision a moment of cubic
for 8 seconds. For instance, for the left, right, push, and pull commands, imagine
the target object floating up into the air.
The cube moves away when the training includes the push command. If the “left”
command is triggered, it will move to the left instead. The neutral state is repre-
sented by the center. The goal is to refine the instructions to ensure that the disparity
between states is significant enough for the EmotivPRO to avoid mistaking one com-
mand for another during live mode.
Feature extraction and classification. The statistical EEGLAB software
(a MATLAB plugin) was used to pre-process the obtained EEG signal. It included a
built-in digital notch filter at 50 Hz and a digital band-pass filter at 60 Hz, covering
a frequency range of 0.16–45 Hz. BCILAB is an EEGLAB plug-in used for designing,
testing, prototyping, exploring, and evaluating BCI. Both of these applications are
MATLAB-based. EEGLAB is well-optimized for processing EEG data and can efficiently
handle datasets of different sizes. BCILAB’s performance depends on the complexity
of the BCI model under development and the computational resources at hand. The
choice between them depends on the research or application requirements. The signal
processing of raw EEG data occurs in multiple phases to transform it into classified
findings that can be accessed by output devices, such as an upper limb exoskeleton.
These phases include feature extraction, classification, and translation. The processing
stage includes feature extraction, feature selection, and classification. The spatial filter
was utilized, and the linear classifier was employed to translate the extracted features
into signals independent of device control. The outputs were normalized to have a
zero mean and a specific desired value range. Open-source packages and functions
can be used to interface with the MATLAB application. It supports the support vec-
tor machine (SVM) classifier package from the Libsvm library, which is an extremely
effective toolkit for optimizing and implementing SVM models. Libsvm’s most essential
functions in the MATLAB environment are “svmtrain” and “svmpredict.” For classifi-
cation, the characteristics are directly input into the SVM model and transformed into
power spectrum density (PSD) in the frequency domain. Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)
is a common method used to convert signals from the time domain to the frequency
domain. In this experiment, w1 and w2 represent the weights of the classes for the
SVM classification algorithm. W1 and w2 are usually equal to 0.5 when there are two
classes and the amount of data in each class is the same. A final EEG signal analy-
sis was performed to categorize the subject’s EEG data into two classes: imagining a
cube movement and employing a facial expression. The computer sends a command
to the upper limb exoskeleton to move the patient’s hand using a Simulink control-
ler based on the best signal accuracy categorization. Each trial’s data is recorded in a
MATLAB matrix file (.mat) with a size of 640 × 14. Only three runs were required to
104 International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 9 (2024)
EEG-Based Control of a 3D-Printed Upper Limb Exoskeleton for Stroke Rehabilitation
train the machine-learning module. Before each trial recording, the subject was asked
to remain calm, avoid clenching their jaw or blinking their eyes (for both motor imag-
ery and facial expression tests), and to listen to the cue sound (beep) signaling the start
of the acquisition procedure. In each trial, the individual performs the task upon hear-
ing the beep sound and stops when hearing another beep after 8 seconds of recording.
Three classifiers were implemented: KNN [17], LDA [18], and SVM, with a flowchart
shown in Figure 4 below.
Fig. 4. Proposed flowchart of SVM classifier used
The architecture of the EEG paradigm is shown in Figure 5.
Fig. 5. Proposed architecture of EEG paradigm for online control of upper limb exoskeleton
iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 9 (2024) International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) 105
Sarhan et al.
2.3 Mechanical design
The exoskeleton was created using a manufacturing technique known as 3D
printing. This method allows for the construction of computer-aided design (CAD)
models using thermoplastics, specifically polylactic acid (PLA). 3D printing offers
customization, simplicity, affordability, and access to open-source designs. It is com-
posed of five DOFs as follows:
1. Shoulder abduction or adduction and flexion or extension: The shoulder servo
motor enables the exoskeleton to move the arm away from or towards the body,
replicating the natural abduction and adduction movements.
2. Elbow flexion or extension: The servo motor in the elbow region enables the
exoskeleton to bend and straighten the user’s arm, replicating the flexion and
extension actions.
3. Wrist flexion or extension: One of the hand region servo motors controls the
wrist’s flexion and extension movements, which are essential for accomplishing
various daily tasks.
4. Wrist abduction or adduction: The second servo motor in the hand region enables
the exoskeleton to execute abduction/adduction movements.
Individual parts and the final design are shown in Figure 6.
Fig. 6. Shows individual parts and final design with five DOFs
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
The successful deployment of EEG-based control of an upper limb exoskeleton
utilizing five distinct facial expressions represents a significant milestone in the field
of assistive technology. Individuals with poor motor function can control a variety
106 International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 9 (2024)
EEG-Based Control of a 3D-Printed Upper Limb Exoskeleton for Stroke Rehabilitation
of complex actions within the exoskeleton by analyzing EEG signals associated with
five specific facial expressions. This unique approach leverages the brain’s capacity
to create intricate neural patterns, enabling users to seamlessly coordinate move-
ments such as flexion, extension, adduction, and abduction simply by evoking the
corresponding facial expressions. The proposed classification approach has been
applied to the recorded EEG data to develop a model capable of classifying motor
imagery and facial expression EEG signals. A subset of the best channels was chosen,
and three classification techniques—SVM, KNN, and LDA algorithms—were used to
test the performance. Better accuracy was achieved with the SVM classifier in both
offline and online modes. A single trial took eight seconds to complete at a sampling
rate of 128 Hz, producing a total of 1024 samples. The motor imagery channels (FC5,
FC6, T7, T8, P7, P8, O1, and O2) and the facial expression channels (AF3, AF4, F7,
F8, F3, and F4) were selected. Figure 7 displays raw data from eight channels of
single-trial EEG signals.
Fig. 7. Selection of (A) eight channels in the motor imagery and (B) six channels of facial
expression case of a single-trial EEG
Table 2 shows the classification accuracy for facial expressions and motor imagi-
nary EEG signals during 10-fold cross-validation.
Table 2. Classification accuracy for facial expressions and motor imaginary of EEG signals
Facial Expressions Accuracy % Motor Imaginary Accuracy %
(20% Test and 80% Train) (20% Test and 80% Train)
No. of Folds
SVM LDA KNN SVM LDA KNN
1 90 88 86 77 72 65
2 89 85 82 73 70 61
3 87 79 88 69 65 63
4 91 90 87 70 61 60
5 92 87 80 67 78 72
6 88 90 77 74 70 71
7 90 89 81 68 64 62
8 92 91 86 80 77 60
9 92 90 88 79 75 68
10 90 90 78 81 77 70
Average 90.1 87.9 83.3 73.8 70.9 65.2
iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 9 (2024) International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) 107
Sarhan et al.
As shown in Table 2, the SVM classifier performed the best in both facial expres-
sions and motor imagery sessions. The average accuracy for facial expressions with
the SVM classifier was 90.1% and 73.8% for motor imagery. There was no difference
in terms of movement performance among the volunteer participants, but there
was a disparity in the speed of the patient’s adaptation to the exoskeleton, which
was slightly slower compared to that of typical individuals. Referring to some stud-
ies in this field, in the study [19], there was an issue with the duration of the reha-
bilitation. The MI group utilized two rehabilitation procedures, leading to a longer
rehabilitation period compared to the control group, which impacted the scoring. In
the study [20], only signals from imagination were utilized, and the predicate was
applied to a healthy individual using only two electrodes EEG sensor, and a whole-
arm manipulator.
Below is an analysis of various aspects of the study:
1. DOFs and movement complexity: The incorporation of five DOFs in the upper
limb exoskeleton allows for a nuanced and naturalistic replication of upper limb
movements. The inclusion of multiple movements, such as hand and elbow
actions, shoulder flexion and extension, and abduction and adduction, addresses
the complex nature of upper limb motor function. In addition to the achieved
accuracy, the range of motion is comparable to that of a healthy individual, and
the response time is estimated to be one second.
2. Control mechanism with EMOTIV EPOC sensor: The utilization of the EMOTIV
EPOC sensor for controlling the upper limb exoskeleton reflects a novel and
non-invasive approach. The sensor, designed to measure and interpret electri-
cal brain activity, offers an intuitive and user-friendly interface for individu-
als with motor impairments. This BCI enables users to control the exoskeleton
using their thoughts, improving the overall user experience and enabling
smooth control.
3. Relevance to rehabilitation: The selected set of movements closely aligns with the
requirements of upper-limb rehabilitation. By enabling hand, elbow, and shoul-
der movements, the exoskeleton can be customized to meet the specific needs of
individuals recovering from various upper limb impairments, including stroke
survivors. This personalized approach is crucial for effective rehabilitation and
relearning of motor skills.
4. Integration of EMOTIV EPOC sensor data: The success of the study in integrat-
ing the EMOTIV EPOC sensor data into the control mechanism demonstrates the
feasibility of translating neural signals into precise and coordinated movements.
The accuracy and efficiency of this integration are crucial for the exoskeleton’s
effectiveness in rehabilitation settings.
5. Challenges and future considerations: While the current study highlights
promising outcomes, future research may need to address potential chal-
lenges such as calibration accuracy, real-time responsiveness, and adapting
the system to different levels of motor impairment. Additionally, user feedback
and long-term usability studies could provide valuable insights for refining the
technology.
Figure 8a shows the topographical map of the scalp for each motor imagery
case (natural, push, pull, left, and right) and (b) the topographical map of the scalp
for facial expressions in each case (eye closed, clench teeth, frown, wink left, and
wink right).
108 International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 9 (2024)
EEG-Based Control of a 3D-Printed Upper Limb Exoskeleton for Stroke Rehabilitation
Fig. 8. The topographical map of the scalp for each motor imaginary (a) and facial expressions (b) cases respectively
The results can be summarized in the following points:
1. More than one method was used to control the exoskeleton, such as facial expres-
sions and motor imagery.
2. The combination of the number of upper-limb movements and the extent of each
movement enhances the effectiveness of the rehabilitation process.
3. The exoskeleton is designed to be easy to wear so that it does not burden
the patient.
4. More than one classifier was used to achieve the highest possible accuracy.
Performance was measured in the following ways:
1. Classification accuracy according to three classifiers: LDA, KNN, and SVM.
2. The response time was approximately one second.
3. The range of movement was completely similar to that of a normal person.
4 CONCLUSION
EEGLAB is more suitable for offline analysis of EEG data, while BCILAB is opti-
mal for both offline and online analysis and classification of EEG data, as well as for
real-time transfer of classification results to external applications. The integration
of these servo motors in the back, shoulder, elbow, and hand regions, along with
the five primary movements, guarantees that the upper limb exoskeleton offers an
efficient and adaptable rehabilitation solution. It enables people with upper limb
impairments to recover their independence, develop their motor skills, and reclaim
a better quality of life. Higher accuracy was achieved using the SVM classifier for
both motor-imaging and facial expression tasks in both offline and online modes.
The criteria used to assess the benefits and performance of the exoskeleton for reha-
bilitation were established based on input from physical therapy specialists. This
input was used to develop software that includes:
• The repetition of movements,
• The time of each movement, and
• The training time.
iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 9 (2024) International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) 109
Sarhan et al.
5 STATEMENTS AND DECLARATIONS
5.1 Funding
The authors declare that no funds, grants, or other support were received during
the preparation of this manuscript.
5.2 Competing interests
The authors declare that there are no financial or personal links that could be
considered competing interests.
5.3 Consent to participate
All of the study’s subjects provided informed consent.
5.4 Consent to publish
The authors affirm that human research participants provided informed consent
for publication.
6 REFERENCES
[1] D. J. McFarland and J. R. Wolpaw, “Brain-computer interfaces for communi-
cation and control,” Commun. ACM, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 60–66, 2011. https://doi.
org/10.1145/1941487.1941506
[2] S. Saha, S. Mamun, K. Ahmed, R. Mostafa, G. Naik, S. Darvishi, A. Khandoker, and
M. Baumert, “Progress in brain-computer interface: Challenges and opportunities,”
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, vol. 15, 2021. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2021.578875
[3] S. M. Sarhan, M. Z. Al-Faiz, and A. M. Takhakh, “A review on EMG/EEG based control
scheme of upper limb rehabilitation robots for stroke patients,” Heliyon, vol. 9, no. 8,
p. e18308, 2023. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e18308
[4] M. Sebastián-Romagosa, W. Cho, R. Ortner, N. Murovec, T. Von Oertzen, K. Kamada,
B. Allison, and C. Guger, “Brain-computer interface treatment for motor rehabilitation
of upper extremity of stroke patients—A feasibility study,” Front. Neurosci., vol. 14,
p. 591435, 2020. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2020.591435
[5] J. Fu, S. Chen, and J. Jia, “Sensorimotor rhythm-based brain–computer interfaces
for motor tasks used in hand upper extremity rehabilitation after stroke: A systematic
review,” Brain Sciences, vol. 13, no. 1, p. 56, 2022. https://doi.org/10.3390/brainsci13010056
[6] M. Z. Al-Faiz and A. A. Al-hamadani, “Analysis and implementation of brain waves fea-
ture extraction and classification to control robotic hand,” Iraqi Journal of Information
& Communications Technology, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 31–41, 2019. https://doi.org/10.31987/
ijict.1.3.35
[7] E. J. Benjamin et al., “Heart disease and stroke statistics-2019 update: A report from the
American Heart Association,” Circulation, vol. 139, no. 10, 2019. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000659
110 International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 9 (2024)
EEG-Based Control of a 3D-Printed Upper Limb Exoskeleton for Stroke Rehabilitation
[8] M. Assefa, A. Tadesse, A. Adane, M. Yimer, and M. Tadesse, “Factors associated with stroke
associated pneumonia among adult stroke patients admitted to University of Gondar
Hospital, Northwest Ethiopia,” Scientific Reports, vol. 12, 2022. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-022-14656-2
[9] M. W. Pugliese et al., “Mobile tablet-based stroke rehabilitation: Using mHealth technol-
ogy to improve access to early stroke rehabilitation,” International Journal of Interactive
Mobile Technologies (iJIM), vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 148–157, 2017. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijim.
v11i1.6234
[10] S. M. Schabrun and S. Hillier, “Evidence for the retraining of sensation after stroke:
A systematic review,” Clinical Rehabilitation, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 27–39, 2009. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0269215508098897
[11] X. Gao, R. Clarke, and D. Zhang, “A review on electroencephalography (EEG)-controlled
upper limb exoskeletons towards stroke rehabilitation,” Brain Netw. Modul., vol. 1, no. 2,
pp. 80–87, 2022. https://doi.org/10.4103/2773-2398.348253
[12] J. Katona and A. Kovari, “EEG-based computer control interface for brain-machine inter-
action,” International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE), vol. 11, no. 6,
pp. 43–48, 2015. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijoe.v11i6.5119
[13] N. Panigrahi and S. P. Mohanty, “Brain-computer interface: EEG signal processing,” in
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2022. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003241386
[14] N. F. Ramsey, “Chapter 1 – Human brain function and brain-computer interfaces,”
in Handbook of Clinical Neurology, 2020, vol. 168, pp. 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-444-63934-9.00001-9
[15] K. J. Miller, D. Hermes, and N. P. Staff, “The current state of electrocorticography-based
brain-computer interfaces,” Neurosurg. Focus, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2020. https://doi.
org/10.3171/2020.4.FOCUS20185
[16] D. L. Schomer, Niedermeyer’s Electroencephalography: Basic Principles, Clinical Appli­
cations, and Related Fields. New York: Oxford University Press, 2018.
[17] M. Z. Al-Faiz, A. A. Ali, and A. H. Miry, “A K-nearest neighbor based algorithm for human
arm movements recognition using EMG signals,” Iraqi Journal for Electrical and Electronic
Engineering, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 158–166, 2010. https://doi.org/10.33762/eeej.2010.54888
[18] B. Saeed, M. Zia-ur-Rehman, S. Gilani, F. Amin, A. Waris, M. Jamil, and M. Shafique,
“Leveraging Ann and Lda classifiers for characterizing different hand movements using
EMG signals,” Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering, vol. 46, pp. 1761–1769, 2021.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13369-020-05044-x
[19] W. Liao, J. Li, X. Zhang, and C. Li, “Motor imagery brain–computer interface rehabilita-
tion system enhances upper limb performance and improves brain activity in stroke
patients: A clinical study,” Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, vol. 17, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fnhum.2023.1117670
[20] B. Xu et al., “Robotic neurorehabilitation system design for stroke patients,” Advances
in Mechanical Engineering, vol. 7, no. 3, p. 168781401557376, 2015. https://doi.org/
10.1177/1687814015573768
7 AUTHORS
Saad M. Sarhan, Biomedical Engineering Department, College of Engineering,
Baghdad University, 2006; Biomedical Engineering Department, College of
Engineering, Al-Nahrain University, Baghdad, Iraq, 2019 (E-mail: saadbme8@
gmail.com).
Prof. Dr. Mohammed Z. Al-Faiz received his M.Sc. and PhD degrees in con-
trol and computer engineering from Brno University, Czech Republic, in 1983 and
iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 9 (2024) International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) 111
Sarhan et al.
1987, respectively. He was dean of information and communications engineering at
Al-Nahrain University in Baghdad, Iraq. He is currently a Professor Emeritus at the
same college, and his interesting research field is robotics, biomedical engineering,
soft computing (ANN, FLC, GA), and the design implementation of artificial upper
and lower humanoid limps using EMG and EEG signals (E-mail: mzalfaiz12@nah-
rainuniv.edu.iq).
Prof. Dr. Ayad M. Takhakh, Institution and department: Department of
Mechanical Engineering, Al-Nahrain University. Skills and expertise: Materials
Engineering, Shape Memory Alloys, Manufacturing Engineering, Friction-Stir
Welding, Prosthetics and Orthotics, Biomaterial Engineering, Biomaterial Coating
(E-mail: ayadmurad@nahrainuniv.edu.iq).
112 International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 9 (2024)