| TYPEOriginalResearch
PUBLISHED14November2023
DOI10.3389/fdgth.2023.1275711
A hackathon as a tool to enhance
research and practice on
’
EDITEDBY electronic health record systems
HarryHochheiser,
UniversityofPittsburgh,UnitedStates
interoperability for chronic disease
REVIEWEDBY
MoomRahmanRoosan,
management and prevention
ChapmanUniversity,UnitedStates
ParisisGallos,
NationalandKapodistrianUniversityofAthens,
Greece Emmanouil S. Rigas1*, Stavros Kostomanolakis2,
*CORRESPONDENCE Nikolaos Kyriakoulakos3, Dimitrios Kounalakis4, Ioannis Petrakis2,
EmmanouilS.Rigas
erigas@auth.gr Alexander Berler5, Asimina Boumpaki6, Haralampos Karanikas7,
RECEIVED10August2023 Athanasios Kelepouris8, Panagiotis D. Bamidis1 and
ACCEPTED20October2023 Dimitrios G. Katehakis2
PUBLISHED14November2023
CITATION 1LabofMedicalPhysicsandDigitalInnovation,SchoolofMedicine,AristotleUniversityofThessaloniki,
RigasES,KostomanolakisS,KyriakoulakosN, Thessaloniki,Greece,2CenterforeHealthApplicationsandServices,InstituteofComputerScience,
FORTH,Heraklion,Greece,3ApolloSA,Athens,Greece,4MedSite,Crete,Greece,5GnomonInformatics
KounalakisD,PetrakisI,BerlerA,BoumpakiA,
SA,Thessaloniki,Greece,6eHealthServicesDepartment,MinistryofHealth,Athens,Greece,7Department
KaranikasH,KelepourisA,BamidisPDand
ofComputerScienceandBiomedicalInformatics,UniversityofThessaly,Lamia,Greece,8Ministryof
KatehakisDG (2023)Ahackathonasatoolto
Health,Athens,Greece
enhanceresearchandpracticeonelectronic
healthrecordsystems’interoperabilityfor
chronicdiseasemanagementandprevention. Objectives: The development of a standardized technical framework for
Front.Digit.Health5:1275711. exchanging electronic health records is widely recognized as a challenging
doi:10.3389/fdgth.2023.1275711
endeavor that necessitates appropriate technological, semantic, organizational,
COPYRIGHT and legal interventions to support the continuity of health and care. In this
©2023Rigas,Kostomanolakis,Kyriakoulakos,
context, this study delineates a pan-European hackathon aimed at evaluating
Kounalakis,Petrakis,Berler,Boumpaki,
Karanikas,Kelepouris,BamidisandKatehakis. the efforts undertaken by member states of the European Union to develop a
Thisisanopen-accessarticledistributedunder European electronic health record exchange format. This format is intended to
thetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttribution
facilitate secure cross-border healthcare and optimize service delivery to
License(CCBY).Theuse,distributionor
reproductioninotherforumsispermitted, citizens,paving theway toward a unifiedEuropeanhealthdata space.
providedtheoriginalauthor(s)andthe Methods: The hackathon was conducted within the scope of the X-eHealth
copyrightowner(s)arecreditedandthatthe
project. Interested parties were initially presented with a representative clinical
originalpublicationinthisjournaliscited,in
accordancewithacceptedacademicpractice. scenario and a set of specifications pertaining to the European electronic health
Nouse,distributionorreproductionis record exchange format, encompassing Laboratory Results Reports, Medical
permittedwhichdoesnotcomplywiththese Imaging and Reports, and Hospital Discharge Reports. In addition, five
terms.
onboarding webinars and two professional training events were organized to
support the participating entities. To ensure a minimum acceptable quality
threshold, a set of inclusion criteria for participants was outlined for the
interested teams.
Results: Eight teams participated in the hackathon, showcasing state-of-the-art
applications. Theseteams utilizedtechnologies suchasHealth Level Seven—Fast
Healthcare Interoperability Resources (HL7 FHIR) and Clinical Document
Architecture (CDA), alongside pertinent IHE integration profiles. They
demonstrated a range of complementary uses and practices, contributing
substantial inputs toward the development of future-proof electronic health
recordmanagement systems.
FrontiersinDigitalHealth 01 frontiersin.org
Rigasetal. 10.3389/fdgth.2023.1275711
Conclusions:Theexecution ofthe hackathondemonstratedthe efficacyof such
approachesinunitingteamsfromdiversebackgroundstodevelopstate-of-the-art
applications. The outcomes produced by the event serve as proof-of-concept
demonstrators for managing and preventing chronic diseases,delivering value to
citizens,companies, andthe researchcommunity.
KEYWORDS
hackathon,digitalhealth,interoperability,electronichealthrecords(EHR),application
1. Introduction European Health Data Space is a health-specific ecosystem
comprised of rules, common standards and practices,
In Europe, chronic diseases are the main contributors to infrastructures, and a governance framework that aims at (a)
morbidity and mortality (1). Chronic conditions often have a empowering individuals through increased digital access to and
sluggish, protracted course of development and are fatal. They control of their electronic personal health data and, at (b)
have increased the load on health systems and caused significant providing a consistent, trustworthy, and efficient set-up for the
human misery. Their impact is immense: in Europe, chronic use of health data for research, innovation, policy-making, and
diseases account for 86% of all deaths, or 4 million annually and regulatoryactivities.
they account for 70%–80% of total healthcare costs in the In this context, the X-eHealth project4 intended to reach a
European Union (EU), or over €700 billion. In addition, many commonunderstanding in theEU onthe effortsneeded toadopt
people are completely unable to work due to chronic illnesses, the commonly defined EEHRxF specifications at different levels
and nearly a quarter of those who do work (i.e., (cid:1)23.5%) suffer and within national EHR solutions in member states. Focus was
from a chronic condition. Therefore, the cost of disease-related paid, amongst others, in the definition, specification, and
absenteeism to the EU’s gross domestic product (GDP) is demonstration of the EEHRxF use cases to support cross-border
projected to be 2:5% yearly.1 It is still difficult to determine the exchange of laboratory results, medical imaging and reports,
precise quantity, distribution, and type of the chronic disease hospital discharge reports, and patient summary for those
burden in Europe. Worldwide, the frequency of chronic illnesses suffering from rare disease and/or comorbidities to elaborate the
is increasing as populations age, and medical advancements roadmap for future uptake on the eHealth Digital Service
make it possible for people with conditions that were formerly Infrastructure (eHDSI) as well as for the additional usage within
deadly to live. The effects on healthcare systems and the society member states onthenational, regional, orlocallevel.
at large are significant, as addressing the burden of chronic Recognizing the escalating need for innovative solutions and
disease presents difficulties and they pose a sizeable burden for skill development in the fast-evolving tech landscape, hackathons
national economies, with associated costs estimated at up to 7% have emerged as vital events for learning and creating.
ofacountry’s gross domesticproduct (2). Hackathons serve as dynamic platforms where individuals, often
The digital transformation of the healthcare domain (3) is with varied skill sets and backgrounds, collaboratively work on
among the top priorities of the EU agenda. Nevertheless, the lack software or hardware projects, usually in a constrained time
of interoperability is a persistent barrier to the deployment of frame (6–8). They foster innovation, creativity, and problem-
digital health services (4, 5). The Commission Recommendation solving, allowing participants to tackle real-world issues or to
on a European Electronic Health Record exchange format explore new technologies and ideas. Hackathons are crucial in
(EEHRxF)2 set out the framework for the development of a the tech ecosystem because they encourage the rapid
EEHRxF in order to achieve secure, interoperable, cross-border development of prototype solutions and help in discovering and
access to, and, exchange of, electronic health data in the EU. nurturing talents. They offer a space where individuals can learn,
Furthermore, the recent proposal for a regulation for the network, and collaborate, enabling the cross-pollination of ideas
European Health Data Space (EHDS)3 includes specific and the development of groundbreaking solutions, often leading
provisions to assist interoperability of EHR systems and of other to entrepreneurial initiatives and start-ups. In addition, they
products transmitting data to electronic health records, including provide companies and organizations an opportunity to identify
medical devices, AI systems, and wellness applications. The potential talents and innovative ideas that can drive growth and
address societal needs. Overall, hackathons have shown to be
efficient (9) in extracting interesting results in emerging
technologies in thewider technology field. It has been adapted in
1https://ec.europa.eu/health/newsletter/169/focus_newsletter_en.htm.
2https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?
uri=CELEX:32019H0243.
3https://health.ec.europa.eu/publications/proposal-regulation-european-
health-data-space_en. 4https://www.x-ehealth.eu/.
FrontiersinDigitalHealth 02 frontiersin.org
Rigasetal. 10.3389/fdgth.2023.1275711
taking place online (10) and has proven efficient in driving technological and innovative solutions can burgeon. Ultimately,
collaborationbetween academiaand industry(11). meticulous planningandacomprehensiveframeworkforexecution
Within the scope of the X-eHealth project, a specialized pave the way for maximizing gains and fostering a fertile
hackathon was strategically organized, aiming to spotlight environment for innovation and development during hackathons.
advanced applications in chronic disease management, with a The specifications and the methodology that was followed to
special emphasis on technologies that enhance interoperability. organizethehackathonaredetailedinthefollowingsections.
This Hackathon intended to serve as a significant element of
ongoing work, concentrating on the effective use of a variety of
state-of-the-art specifications, such as HL7 FHIR, which is a 2.1. Clinical scenario
standard that defines how healthcare information can be
exchanged between different computer systems regardless of how Anindicativeclinicalscenariowasdevelopedforthepurposes
it is stored in those systems, or HL7 CDA, which provides of the proof of concept, including entry points for the use of
essential implementer guidance to continuously expand EEHRxF. This scenario reveals several cases that the EEHRxF
interoperability for clinical information shared via structured specifications can be used such as (1) exchange blood test results
clinical notes. The event also aimed to address multilayered and imaging data between professionals in different settings and
challenges in healthcare, such as disparities in terminologies the patient, (2) transfer of hospital medical reports to family
and the intricacies of multilingualism toward promoting doctors and social services, (3) pathways for sickness certificates,
innovative applications of EEHRxF, elevating awareness, and (4) vital signs’ measurements between patient and doctor.
enriching capacity, and spreading knowledge throughout Europe. The full description of the indicative clinical scenario can be
Particular emphasis was placed on the efficient exchange of found in the hackathon’s webpage.5 In all cases, both mobile and
electronic health records, leveraging specifications developed by standard computer devices should be included, and different
the X-eHealth project, aligned with upcoming regulations for software applications and systems are involved from different
theEHDS. software providers. The clinical scenario described a challenging
Through the organization, execution, and debriefing of the problem inlifecritical domainsasitisthehealthcare sector.
hackathon that is presented in the next sections, it becomes
evident that such events have the ability to help toward the
specifications’ maturity. Moreover, the number and the quality of 2.2. European electronic health record
exchange format
the participating teams and the solutions that were presented
made it clear that the community has a high interest in this
problem and that engineers and scientists with high levels of The Commission Recommendation on a European Electronic
expertise exist. Health Record exchange format6 set out the framework for the
development of an EEHRxF in order to achieve secure,
interoperable, cross-border access to, and exchange of, electronic
2. Methods health data in the EU. Priority was explicitly focused on the
exchange of patient summaries, electronic prescriptions/
Theaimofthedescribedworkistohighlight,contribute,and dispensations, medical images and image reports, laboratory
support the European eHealth interoperability and the results, and hospital discharge reports. For the purposes of this
implementation of the EEHRxF through standardization and work, emphasis was put on the exchange of laboratory results
harmonization of health data, by raising quality and safety reports, medical imaging and reports, and hospital discharge
toward empowering citizens, healthcare professionals, and reports.
institutions. As such, following the development of the
appropriate clinical scenario, upon which relevant use cases were 2.2.1. Laboratory result reports
selected for demonstrating the proof of concept, the technologies Clinicallaboratoryresultsplayanimportantroleindiagnosis,
recommended for use for the purposes of the proof of concept treatment,and follow-upof patients. Sharing oflaboratory results
were detailed for the use cases under validation. Assessment in cross-border health information exchange facilitates chronic
criteria as well as the methodological process to maximize the disease management and prevention, and is one of the priorities
uptake of EEHRxF for chronic diseases management and fortheextensionof eHDSI.
prevention were introduced. The approach of providing detailed From the business analysis of the laboratory domain, several
specifications to hackathon participants is commonplace in similar general use cases have been considered, each of them having a
events and has proven to be beneficial to the participants (12, 13).
Moreover, to optimize the output in terms of innovations and
advancements from a hackathon, various best practices and
recommendations have been formulated and should be prudently
implemented (14, 15). Adopting such methodologies not only 5https://www.x-ehealth.eu/hackathon-for-chronic-disease-management/.
enhances the overall productivity and outcomes of the event but 6https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?
also ensures a structured and efficacious platform where uri=CELEX:32019H0243.
FrontiersinDigitalHealth 03 frontiersin.org
Rigasetal. 10.3389/fdgth.2023.1275711
FIGURE1
ClinicallabcontentstandardizationprocessforLRRdocument.
different level of priority. For the purposes of the hackathon, the managing, and publishing FHIR-based specifications. ART-
querying of lab results and the laboratory results report use cases DECOR is an open-source tool suite that supports the creation
were found to be the most relevant for the provided indicative and maintenance of HL7 templates, value sets, scenarios, and
clinical scenario.7 Furthermore, a modeling approach that is data sets. It is an established tool to manage the specifications
based on the clinical information modeling standards as and itwasalsoused by theX-eHealth project.
described by ISO/ TS 13972:20228 is adopted to define the
information model for the Laboratory Result Report (LRR)
2.2.2. Medical imaging and reports
document (see Figure 1). Logical laboratory information model
Themainobjectiveforsharingimagesanddiagnosticreportsis
was divided into several parts (partial models) due to its
complexity. Some of the partial models are specific for the toallowauthorizedhealthcareprovidersandpatientstoaccessthe
patient’s imaging records from any types of systems (EMR, EHR,
laboratory domain while other models are more general (could
PACS, mobile applications, etc.) stored in several repositories
bereusedalsooutsidelaboratorydomain).
Thefunctionalspecificationsandclinicalrequirementsderived belonging tooneormoreaffinity domains.
Todescribethedifferentcommonelementsthatarepartofthe
from the business analysis of the laboratory domain provide the
input to the implementable specifications where two different DiagnosticImagingReport,certaininformationmodelshavebeen
formats of the LRR document are defined: HL7 CDA R2 developed to reduce the complexity of the business process
architecture and provide support for informed decision making.
(required) and HL7 FHIR R4 (optional). The hackathon
These information models allow mapping functional
participants were provided with all the appropriate resources to
the definitions of the LaboratoryResult Reportdocument in both specifications to HL7 CDA14 and contain the elements grouped
in different information packages (known as modules), which
formats (CDA and FHIR) with the aim to experiment with the
can be optional or mandatory depending on the medical needs
adoption and deployment of these formats to their products and
finally to facilitate exchange of such LLR documents cross- of the healthcare institutions as well as the data available to
border. Specifically, the tool called ART-Decor9 has been used preparethehospitaldischarge report.
The information model15 for Medical Imaging and Imaging
for specifying, managing, and publishing the CDA R2 Templates;
and the combination of GitHub,10 FHIR Shorthand (FSH),11 Reports is presented in Figure 2. This information model is
FHIR Implementation Guide (IG) Publisher,12 and the FHIR compatible with the Diagnostic Imaging report using DICOM
Continuous Integration (CI)-Build site13 for specifying, part 2016 as the basis of the specification for the X-eHealth IG
Diagnostic Imaging Report developed in Art Décor.17 DICOM
7https://www.x-ehealth.eu/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/D5.3-Laboratory- 14http://www.hl7.org/implement/standards/product_brief.cfm?
Requests-and-Reports-guideline-and-functional-specifications.pdf. product_id=7.
8https://www.iso.org/standard/79498.html. 15https://www.x-ehealth.eu/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/D5.4-Medical-
9https://wordpress.art-decor.org/. Imaging-and-Imaging-Reports-guideline-and-functional-specifications.pdf.
10http://github.com/. 16https://dicom.nema.org/medical/dicom/2022e/output/pdf/
11https://build.fhir.org/ig/HL7/fhir-shorthand/. part20_changes.pdf.
12https://github.com/HL7/fhir-ig-publisher. 17https://art-decor.ihe-europe.net/art-decor/decor-templates–DICOM-?
13https://build.fhir.org/. section=templates.
FrontiersinDigitalHealth 04 frontiersin.org
Rigasetal. 10.3389/fdgth.2023.1275711
FIGURE2
X-eHealthinformationmodel.
part 20 (Imaging reports using HL7 CDA) considered multiple or in a rendered format, such as JPEG. FHIR also defines the
layers of constraints from HL7v3 RIM, CDA r2, DICOM, and resource DiagnosticReport,21 which includes clinical context such
professional contents for specialized procedures. The as requesting and provider information, and some mix of atomic
relationships between X-eHealth information model, HL7 CDA, results, images, textual and coded interpretations, and formatted
and DICOM part 20 are presented in the X-eHealth representationofdiagnosticreports.
implementationguide fordiagnostic imagingreport.
As far as mapping functional specifications to HL7 FHIR is
2.2.3. Hospital discharge reports
concerned, FHIR diagnostic report18 regroups the resources
The main information model for Hospital Discharge Report
about the diagnostic report itself and about the subject. It
(HDR) consists of several concepts that cover different types of
provides a combination of request information, atomic results,
information, some of them being containers (modules) of other
images, interpretation, and formatted reports. As described above
concepts. The model is composed of “containers,” which are the
for DICOM part 20, the FHIR Diagnostic report is constructed
main structural units produced to represent the logical hierarchy
in the same way: from imaging studies on the top of the
of an information system, from which all other components are
hierarchy, to series of images in the middle, and to instances at
derived. Relationships may exist between two or more containers
thelowerlevel.
indicating that at least one is a sub-component of the other (e.g.,
FHIR resources are specified in the FHIR IG.19 The IG helps
the “Address” container may be associated with the “Patient”
solve problems and clarify the use of the resources providing a
container, as the patient is always associated with some address).
human-readable part as well as a set of computable conformance
To implement the designed HDR information model, a set of
resources. FHIR defines the resource ImagingStudy,20 which
candidate HL7 CDA templates and FHIR profiles have been
provides information on a DICOM imaging study, and the series
selected among those defined and used in existing standardized
and imaging objects in that study. It also provides information
Hospital Discharge Result Reportorrelateddocuments.
on how to retrieve that information in a native DICOM format,
The aim of the information models is to help define the
detailed structure. It is essentially a non-exhaustive “list” of key
components organized into a hierarchical structure that reflects
18https://build.fhir.org/diagnosticreport.html.
19https://www.hl7.org/fhir/implementationguide.html.
20https://hl7.org/fhir/imagingstudy.html 21https://www.hl7.org/fhir/diagnosticreport.html
FrontiersinDigitalHealth 05 frontiersin.org
Rigasetal. 10.3389/fdgth.2023.1275711
FIGURE3
AlogicalmodelofthecommonEUhospitaldischargereport.
the varying relationships among them. Individual models reuse 2.3. Recommended technologies
other modules (formalized as Information Models); each module
describes different aspects of common parts of the X-eHealth Initialforeseentechnologieshavebeenselectedandintroduced
documents, e.g., the detail of the hospital encounter documented tothehackathonparticipants,inordertosupportstandardizedand
by the HDR. The HDR information model (see Figure 2) is the secureexchangeofEHRinformationintheirintroducedproof-of-
entrypoint for theHDRdocument.22 concept. Thesetechnologies are briefly presented below:
To implement the designed HDR information model (see
(cid:129) HL7 FHIR: Healthcare data can be shared across various
Figure 3), a set of candidate section templates have been selected
among those defined and used in existing standardized Discharge computer systems independent of how they are kept in those
systems according to the HL7 FHIR standard. This makes it
Summaries or related documents. For the HL7 FHIR
possible for clinical and administrative data to be securely
implementation, general considerations similar to those done for
accessible to those who require it and to those who have the
the HL7 CDA implementation have been done. A set of tools
right to do so on behalf of a patient receiving care. A
used in order to generate FHIR human-readable IG and the
collection of modular parts known as “Resources” is used to
computable FHIRpackagecan bepublishedina publicsite.
construct FHIR solutions. These materials can be quickly
combined into functional systems that, for a small fraction of
the cost of current options, address actual clinical and
administrative issues. FHIR is suitable to be used in a wide
variety of contexts, such as mobile apps, cloud
communications, EHR-based data sharing, and server
22https://www.x-ehealth.eu/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/D5.5-%E2%80% communication in large institutional healthcare providers. The
93-Hospital-Discharge-Reports-guideline-and-functional-specifications. X-eHealth FHIR IG provides a human-readable representation
pdf. as a browsable website and a list of artifacts including
FrontiersinDigitalHealth 06 frontiersin.org
Rigasetal. 10.3389/fdgth.2023.1275711
examples of Logical Models, Resource Profiles, Extension TABLE1 Summaryofwebinars.
Definitions, and Terminologies. The on-development X-
No. of Description
eHealth FHIRIGwillbepublished inthebuild.fhir.org site.23
webinar
(cid:129) HL7 CDA: In order to facilitate the transmission of “clinical Webinar1 Introductiontothehackathonandthespecifications
papers” between healthcare professionals and patients, HL7 Webinar2 IntroductiontothehackathonandtheX-eHealthproject.
developed the Clinical Document Architecture, which is a DetailsaboutspecificationsonArtDecorandhospitaldischarge
document markup standard. According to its definition, a reports
Webinar3 IntroductiontothehackathonandtheX-eHealthproject.
clinical document must possess the following six
Detailsaboutausecaserelatedtorarediseasesand
characteristics: (i) persistence, (ii) stewardship, (iii) potential specificationsonlabreports
forauthentication, (iv) context, (v) wholeness, and (vi) human Webinar4 Introductiontothehackathonanddetailsaboutmedical
readability. X-eHealth CDA specifications are published in the imagingandhospitaldischargereports
Art Decor X-eHealth project environment.24 As mentioned Webinar5 Preparationoftheparticipatingteamsfortheupcoming
hackathon
before, Art Decor is an open-source tool suite that supports
the creation and maintenance of HL7 templates, value sets,
scenarios, and data sets. The tool features cloud-based collaborative and informative context, several on-boarding
federated Building Block Repositories (BBR) for templates and webinars (summarized in Table 1) were orchestrated to pave the
valuesets. way forasuccessful event.
(cid:129) IHE XDS: This Cross-Enterprise Document Sharing profile The aim of hosting these webinars was multifaceted. First,
explains how to go about sharing medical data electronically they served as a communicative platform to introduce the
withpeers. hackathon to potential participants, elucidating the logistics and
(cid:129) IHE MHD: In order to make the deployment of mobile apps technical specifications that would guide the creations during the
more consistent and reusable, the Mobile access to Health event. Second, they played a crucial role in drawing attention
Documents (MHD) Profile defines one standardized interface from the community by effectively communicating the event’s
to health document sharing [i.e., an Application Programming significance and details, thereby ensuring that participants were
Interface (API)] forusage by mobiledevices. well-prepared tocrafthigh-quality, innovative applications during
(cid:129) IHE XDR-I: Using a dependable messaging system, Cross- thehackathon.
Enterprise Document Reliable Interchange of Images (XDR-I) To elaborate, a series of five meticulously planned webinars
offers DICOM service-object pair (SOP) instances and image were conducted. The inaugural webinar offered a comprehensive
reports. This enables direct imaging document exchange introduction to the hackathon and delineated the relevant
between a source of imaging documents and other healthcare specifications. The second one reached out to all interested
ITsystemsthatsupport imagingdocuments. stakeholders, unraveling the concept and the pressing need for
(cid:129) IHEXDR:ThepurposeofCross-EnterpriseDocumentReliable the hackathon, and detailed the objectives of the X-eHealth
Interchange (XDR) is to serve as a quick, point-to-point project along with nuances of Art Decor and hospital discharge
introduction to XDS. To transfer documents and related reports.
metadata between two systems, it uses the Provide and Thethirdwebinarenlightenedstakeholdersaboutauniqueuse
RegisterDocumentSettransaction,which was firstspecified in case centered around rare diseases and specifications pertinent to
XDS. lab reports, reinforcing the concept and aims of the hackathon
(cid:129) IHE XDM: Cross-Enterprise Document Media Interchange and the X-eHealth project. The fourth webinar delved deeper,
(XDM) enables document exchange over a variety of common exploring aspects of medical imaging and hospital discharge
media types using a common file and directorystructure. This reports.
enables the patient to carry medical records on tangible Thefifthandconcludingwebinarwasinstrumentalingearing
media. This also makes it possible to send medical documents uptheparticipatingteamsfortheforthcominghackathon,withan
viapersonalemail. initial focus on specifications related to HL7 FHIR, followed by
illustrative examples centered around medical imaging.
2.4. Capacity building Subsequently, the teams enrolled for the hackathon were
introduced, and the event’s agenda, the meticulously planned
Oncethescenariofocusedonchronicdiseasemanagementwas program spanning the three days of the hackathon, and the
meticulously finalized and the associated specifications were evaluation criteria to be employed were shared with the
carefully identified and detailed, the intricate process of participants.
preparing for the hackathon was set into motion. In this highly Concurrently, two professional training events were also
conducted, titled “Sharing Laboratory Data Cross-Borders:
Understanding Future Direction and Technical Solutions for
Laboratory Data Exchange” and “Data Exchange for Better
Health—Accessing and Sharing Medical Images and Discharge
23https://build.fhir.org/ig/hl7-eu/x-ehealth/artifacts.html. Letters Across Europe,” offering deeper insights and perspectives
24https://art-decor.org/art-decor/decor-project–eehrxf-. onthethemes of thehackathon.
FrontiersinDigitalHealth 07 frontiersin.org
Rigasetal. 10.3389/fdgth.2023.1275711
These webinars and training events were not merely TABLE2 X-eHealthhackathonprogramandcontents.
informative sessions but were pivotal in setting the tone for the
Day of Description
hackathon, ensuring participants were well-informed, and
hackathon
fostering an environment conducive to innovation and learning,
Day1:7June2022 Keynotespeechesbyprojectmanagerandtaskleader.Short
ultimately contributing to the realization of the overarching goals introductionofeachteam.Shortpresentationofavailable
ofthe X-eHealthproject. materialandtoolstotheteam.Hackathonrulesandlogistics.
Day2:8June2022 Askanythingspecialthemes:Laboratoryrequestsand
reports,medicalimagingandreports,refinedPSforread
diseases.Hospitaldischargereports.
2.5. Assessment criteria
Day3:9June2022 Welcomeandintroduction.Recapofeventandhackathon
logistics.Participants’presentations.Hackathonresults
announcement.MyHealth@EUcurrentandfutureservices.
The assessment criteria selected for the evaluation of each of
Keynotespeech—ThefutureoftheEuropeanElectronic
the propositions for proof-of-concept to be presented by the HealthRecordExchangeFormat.Futureeventsandclosing
participants were decided to be (i) innovation and originality, (ii) notesfromtheX-eHealthProject.
impact and benefit for the patient and other stakeholders of the
healthcare system, (iii) applicability and degree of
3.1. Proofs of concept
implementation of functional features that have business value,
(iv) feasibility and technical soundness, (v) technical background
and whether a live demonstration of a running application is
Outoftheeightteams,sevenparticipatedinthefinaldayofthe
presented, and (vi) contribution to the EEHRxF development hackathon and showcased their works. Each presented work, to
and feedback provided to the EEHRxF specifications. These some extent, related to the topics provided by the X-eHealth
criteria were selected based on the experience of the organizing project. The contribution of each team is described in the
team and the needs of the X-eHealth project. The teams that following paragraphs and is summarized in Table 3. Note that
took part in the event’s final day and presented their work met all thematerialproducedduring the event is available online.25
the aforementioned requirements, following an initial screening
process. (cid:129) DoctorNearYou: Proposed a platform that provides eHealth
services, which are user-friendly and convenient connecting
patients with Healthcare Professionals. The aim of this
3. Results
platform was to increase sales by driving adoption of
telemedicine services in Greece among locals and touristsalike
Oncealltheapplicationformssubmittedfrominterestedteams drive increase of eRx and e-appointment services with
were collected, these were evaluated based on the relation of the healthcare professionals. It leverages the HL7 FHIR standard
proposed solution with the scope of the hackathon and on the in order to retrieve and store synchronized healthcare data in
technologies that were proposed to be used and whether these aninteroperable, efficient, and secureway.
were to some extent matching the specifications that were (cid:129) GNOMON-TEAM: Proposed a solution to collect important
provided. In total, 12 teams declared their intention to information from the continuity of care record of a patient,
participate in the event, of which eight were selected to considering displaying patient summaries (EU and IPS
participateinthefinal event. format), displaying lab reports and medical imaging reports,
Theproof-of-concepteventtookplaceintheformofanonline displaying hospital discharge letter information, and
hackathon between 7 and 9 June 2022 (see detailed program in visualizing current and past medication lists. The area of
Table 2 and an indicative screenshot of the event in Figure 4). application is ePrescription for medication and HL7.FHIR,
The first day of the event involved a welcome message and IHE.XDS,HL7.CDAwere used.
keynote speeches by the project manager and the relevant task (cid:129) HiSpin: Participated with the adoption of the X-eHEALTH
leader, a short introduction of each participating team, a short format for health data exchange of clinical lab results between
presentation of the available material and tools to the teams, and HiSpin’s CiviCARE Personal Health Record (PHR) and health
the presentation of the hackathon’s rules and logistics. In total, information systems. CiviCARE PHR helps citizens and
44 participants attended this first part of the hackathon. In patients to store all their health information in one place and
addition, the teams had the chance to discuss with the mentors share with healthcare professionals of their choice. A key
that were assigned to them in one-to-one meetings. During the characteristicof CiviCAREisthatit is by design interoperable,
second day, informing sessions regarding the four specifications using a data model based on HL7-FHIR. CiviCARE intends to
were organized and they were open to be attended by any use additional acknowledged standards for data export and
interested participant. Finally, during the third and final day of transmission so that it can communicate with health
the event, the presentation of the proof-of-concept applications
from the participating teams took place. The evaluation of the
proof of concepts and their demonstrators were used to capture
and share best practices and guidelines for EEHRxF
implementation. 25https://www.x-ehealth.eu/hackathon-for-chronic-disease-management/.
FrontiersinDigitalHealth 08 frontiersin.org
Rigasetal. 10.3389/fdgth.2023.1275711
FIGURE4
Snapshotofthehackathonevent-day3.
TABLE3 Summaryofteamsthatparticipatedinthefinalhackathonevent.
Teamname Areaof application Characteristics Technology Demonstration scale
DoctorNearYou eHealthServices Product;othereHealthServices HL7FHIR,HL7CDA Local
GNOMON-TEAM ePrescriptionformedication Prototype;product HL7.FHIR,IHE.XDS,HL7.CDA Regional;cross-border
HiSpin Laboratory Prototype HL7-FHIR Local
iMedPhys-AUTH Laboratory Prototype;deliverablein HL7FHIR Regional
researchproject
dm-RET Telemonitoring—teleconsultation Deliverableinresearchproject HL7FHIR Local
IntegratedCare Laboratory,dischargeletters,radiology, Product HL7FHIR,HL7CDA,IHEXDS Local;regional;national;cross-
Solutions imaging,patientsummary andother border
eHealth4U Dischargelettersandlaboratory Prototype;Deliverablein HL7FHIR National
researchproject
informationsystemsandclinicallaboratoriesprovidedtheyalso interventions aimed at improving the clinical management of
adopt established standards. In the content of this hackathon, patients with chronic heart failure, reducing their mortality
the export functionality of lab results in the X-eHEALTH and hospitalization rates, and improving their quality of life,
formatwasimplemented asan earlyprototype. safety, and wellbeing.
(cid:129) iMedPhys-AUTH: Proposed an FHIR-based application that (cid:129) Integrated Care Solutions: Presented a suite of products that
takes as input a laboratory report and uses an ML algorithm addresses the needs of patient-centric healthcare systems, in
to predict if a patient has over 50% stenosis of the coronary order to proactively manage clinical and administrative
artery, whichleadstothe need toundergo coronary computed processes and activities. Each software module can be installed
tomography angiography (CCTA). Variables from lab results at one or more departments of a health organization. Modules
were mapped to FHIR resources before they were fed into the are interoperable with each other and modules of third-party
MLalgorithmsforfurtheranalysis. systems. All applications can exchange information, so that all
(cid:129) dm-RET: The aim of the proposed solution is to improve the records are stored uniformly and reviewed by all users with
quality of life via tele-monitoring and tele-consulting of the permission rights. At the same time, these applications can
heart failure patient using the HL7 FHIR standard. exchange information with disparate systems that support
Specifically, it aims to develop and deliver an innovative international standards facilitating national and cross-border
platform supporting enhanced clinical monitoring and exchange ofEHRdata.
FrontiersinDigitalHealth 09 frontiersin.org
Rigasetal. 10.3389/fdgth.2023.1275711
(cid:129) eHealth4U—Integrated National EHR System in Cyprus: The TABLE4 Summaryoftheevaluationfromtheparticipants.
proposed application was part of the eHealth4U project that
Question Summaryof replies
undertakes the challenge of defining the structure and the
Didyouparticipateinanyteam? Yes:81%,No:19%
content of the national integrated EHR system in Cyprus and Howoldareyou? 18–29:7%,30–39:40%,40–49:46%,
developing a prototype of it. Their vision is that the outcome olderthan50:7%
of this project will establish the foundations of the country’s Howmanyyearsofworkingexperience <10years:31%,.¼10years:69%
broader eHealth ecosystem adhering to the Electronic Health doyouhave?
Whatisthetypeofyourorganization? Publicsector:50%,privatesector:50%
Law of Cyprus (No.59(I)/2019). It involves discharge letters
Pleaseselectyourprofession Engineers:50%,medicalinformatics
andlaboratory results. researchers:19%,softwaredevelopers:
13%,other:18%
3.2. Hackathon’s evaluation from the teams Howdoyouratethewebinarsthattook Score5:50%,score4:37:5%,score3:
placepriortotheevent? 12:5%
Howdoyouratethetechnicalmaterial Score5:43:75%,score4:37:5%,score3:
Oncethehackathonended,theparticipantswereprovidedwith thatwasprovidedtoyoubythe 18:75%
a detailed questionnaire to evaluate the event both in terms of its organizers?
organization and in terms of its ability to produce insightful Howdoyouratethesupportyou Score5:62:5%,score4:25%,score3:
results. The main questions are summarized as follows and receivedduringtheevent? 12:5%
Howdoyouratethetopicofthe Score5:87:5%,score4:12:5%
summarizedin Table 4:
hackathon?
The following questions are related to the profile of the Howdoyouratethefeedbackthatyou Score5:50%,score4:31:25%,score
participants. In the question Did you participate in any team?, receivedfromtheevaluationcommittee? 3:12:5%,score2:6:25%
81% of the replies were positive and 19% were negative. This Towhatextenthasthishackathon Score5:62:5%,score4:12:5%,score3:
helpedyouindevelopinginnovative 12:5%,score2:6:25%
means that the majority of the people that participated in the
solutions?
hackathon were involved in one of the teams, but participants Towhatextenthasthishackathon Score5:43:75%,score4:31:25%,score
that were just interested in the topic also existed. In the question helpedyoutoexpandyourtechnical 3:12:5%,score2:6:25%
How old are you?, 7% were between 18 and 29 years, 40% were abilitiesandknowledge?
between 30 and 39 years, 46% were between 40 and 49 years, Howdoyouratethehackathonoverall? Score5:43:75%,score4:53:25%
and 7% were older than 50 years. From these results, we can
conclude that most of the participants can be considered evaluation committee?, 50% scored it with 5, 31:25% scored it
experienced researchers and/or practitioners. This can be with 4, 12:5% scored it with 3, and 6:25% scored it with 2. In
supported by the fact that in the question How many years of
the question To what extent has this hackathon helped you in
working experience do you have?, 69% stated that they have more developing innovative solutions?, 62:5% scored it with 5, 12:5%
than 10 years of experience. In the question What is the type of scored it with 4, 12:5% scored it with 3, and 6:25% with 2. In
your organization?, 50% of the participants stated that they come
the question To what extent has this hackathon helped you to
from public institutions and 50% from the private sector. This expand your technical abilities and knowledge?, 43:75% scored it
shows that there was a balance between people from academia with 5, 31:25% scored it with 4, 12:5% scored it with 3, and
and people from the industry. Finally, in the question Please 6:25% scored it with 2. Finally, in the question How do you rate
select your profession, the majority were engineers (25%), medical the hackathon overall?, 43:75% scored it with 5 and 53:25%
informatics researchers (19%) and software developers (13%),
scored itwith 4. Fromthis set of questions, we can conclude that
while healthcare providers, laboratory technicians, data scientists, overall the participants were satisfied by the topic of the
technology service providers in healthcare, researchers, and
hackathon, the feedback they received, and its usefulness in
policymakers alsoexisted.
expanding their skills. However, in the last two areas, some space
Thefollowingquestionsarerelatedtotheparticipants’opinion
forimprovements exists.
onthehackathonandareinLikertscale(1:lowerscore,5:higher
score).InthequestionHowdoyouratethewebinarsthattookplace
prior to the event?, 50% scored them with 5, 37:5% scored them
with 4, and 12:5% scored them with 3. In the question How do 4. Discussion
you rate the technical material that was provided to you by the
organizers?, 43:75% scored it with 5, 37:5% scored it with 4, and Medical tourism, support for continuity of care, personal
18:75% scored it with 3. In the question How do you rate the health records, secondary use of data, telemonitoring and
support you received during the event?, 62:5% scored it with 5, teleconsultation, hospital care, and establishment of a national
25% scored it with 4, and 12:5% scored it with 3. From these EHR system were some of the areas and application types
three questions, we can conclude that the participants were included in the suggested proof of concept applications. Target
overall satisfied from the support thatwasprovidedto them both audiences for the hackathon included researchers, medical
priorand during theevent. experts, the general public (patients), and national authorities.
In the question How do you rate the topic of the hackathon?, Several technologies were employed, including HL7 FHIR, IHE
87:5% scored it with 5 and 12:5% scored it with 4. In the XDS, and HL7 CDA. The standard framework created by the X-
question How do you rate the feedback that you received from the eHealth project for medical imaging, discharge letters, lab
FrontiersinDigitalHealth 10 frontiersin.org
Rigasetal. 10.3389/fdgth.2023.1275711
findings,andpatientsummarieswasimplementedintotheproofof cross-disciplinary collaboration, and enabling the rapid exchange
concepts. We contend that the X-eHealth standards that were ofideas andexpertise.
evaluated during the hackathon considerably aided the This undertaking provided invaluable feedback essential for
participating teams in developing the presented apps, even refining the EEHRxF’s functional and technical specifications to
though they could not be regarded as final at the time of the improve patient summaries, discharge summaries, lab results,
event. These applications addressed the usage of EEHRxF at all imaging studies, and reports, especially for patients dealing with
levels and were based on both commercial goods and research chronic diseases or comorbidities. Finally, the positive feedback
efforts (i.e., cross-border, national, regional, and local level). received from the participating teams concerning the
Although some of the applications were not directly related to organization and the applicability of the hackathon has sown
chronic diseases, theyhave the potential tobe adapted tobe used seeds of motivation for the conduct of similar events in the
insuch diseases aswell. future, underscoring the invaluable role of hackathons in driving
Thishackathoncreatedacollaborativespacefordiversetalents, forward innovationsinhealthcare.
fosteringthecreationofimpactfulsolutionsandattractinginterest
forfurtherrefinementandresearchfromvariousstakeholdersand
experts. The innovations conceived in this vibrant environment, 5. Conclusion
with proper support and direction, are poised to be influential in
advancing science, technology, and economic growth. The The absence of a finalized standard on exchanging electronic
outcomes of this hackathon confirm the usefulness of such health records across the EU puts barriers in the design,
events as has been described in the literature. For example, development, take-up, sustainability, and exploitation of such
Yarmohammadian et al. (16) describe and support the use of applications that depend on availability of EHR data. Through
hackathons to educate students in health-related technological the organization, execution, and debriefing of the hackathon that
domains. Poncette et al. (14) depict hackathons as drivers for was presented in this paper, it became evident that such events
healthcare innovations and outline the cost and time have the ability to help toward the specifications’ maturity.
effectiveness of such approaches. Finally, Wang et al. (17) praise Moreover, the number and the quality of the teams that
the usefulness of hackathons to promote collaborations between participated in the event and the solutions that were presented
researchers and practitioners from different institutions and made it clear that the community has high interest in this
possibly countries. In this context, we argue that this hackathon problem and that engineers and scientists with high levels of
has been a catalyst for developing applications with significant expertise exist. In addition, it proved that hackathons have the
scientific and practical merit, holding the potential to transform ability to produce valuable applications and insights into
intoinnovative start-ups and revolutionary products (13). emerging technological areas. Thus, the successful execution of
Onthethirddayoftheevent,ahighlyinsightfulconversation this hackathon led to the organization from the X-eHealth
about the EEHRxF’s future was also started. It focused on the project of a second hackathon on Rare Diseases and Cancers.26
function of the X-eHealth project and how it fits into the overall Overall, the participants that have experience in Healthcare
context of European digital health. In order to support Standards technologies that are used in the X-eHealth project
interoperability and data portability, which would improve (e.g., CDA, FHIR, Document Sharing infrastructure) confirmed
individual ownership over their electronic health data, the that the emerging standards are very close to the already existing
envisioned shared EHDS establishes important specifications exchange formats (e.g., IPS, ePrescription, Diagnostic Report,
expressly for EHR systems. The new data domains that the X- etc.), and they felt confident that they could easily incorporate
eHealth project is concentrating on are included in the priority themintotheir systems.
categories of electronic health data for primary use that are While hackathons are lauded for fostering innovation and
outlinedinthe proposed regulation. collaboration, they face several limitations including time
Consequently, the consensus among the involved parties constraints, which often result in underdeveloped prototypes.
underscores the crucial necessity to integrate into both existing The lack of post-event support impedes the sustainability and
and emerging systems the capability to generate and interpret further development of promising projects. The rapid, intense
medical documents in a standardized format. It is also vital to nature of these events sometimes compromises the depth and
utilize standardized technologies for exchanging these documents quality of solutions and can lead to participant burnout.
in their domestic and international interactions. The information Furthermore, diversity and inclusion challenges, intellectual
derived is anticipated to enlighten governments, trade property disputes, limited scope, and accessibility issues can
associations, patients, health professionals, and informal caregiver narrow the range of solutions and hinder broader participation.
associations and will also lay the groundwork for discussions Monetary constraints and lack of adequate rewards can also
introducing new use cases of the eHN multiannual work impactmotivation, and manysolutions facesignificanthurdles in
program. The hackathon proved exceptionally useful in this
context, serving as a creative and collaborative environment
where diverse teams could troubleshoot, innovate, and rapidly
prototype solutions. It highlighted the value of such events in
accelerating the development of practical solutions, fostering 26https://www.x-ehealth.eu/hackathon-for-rare-diseases-and-cancers/.
FrontiersinDigitalHealth 11 frontiersin.org
Rigasetal. 10.3389/fdgth.2023.1275711
real-world implementation due to feasibility and adaptability draft. NK: Methodology, Software, Writing – original draft. DK:
concerns. Balancing these limitations with effective organization, Conceptualization, Investigation, Writing – original draft. IP:
clear objectives, and participant support can elevate the overall Methodology, Software, Writing – original draft. ABe:
impact and productivity of hackathons. Apart from these, the Conceptualization, Writing – original draft. ABo:
described study has the following limitations: (1) The study used Conceptualization, Writing – original draft. HK:
a limited number of specifications that focused on specific use Conceptualization, Writing – original draft. AK:
cases. (2) Given the provided specifications, the developed Conceptualization, Writing – original draft. PB:
solutions were related to the interests of the project’s community Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – original draft. DGK:
of practice. (3) The emphasis of the study was on the practical Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing –original draft.
aspects of developing usable solutions related to the EU’s policy
on interoperability healthcare systems. The specifications were
designed based on this need. (4) The methodological approach
was based on the approved methodology of implementing a Funding
project27 for future expansion of the EEHRxF standard. (5) The
aim of this study centered on the practical aspects of developing The authors declare financial support was received for the
solutions to support interoperability, while scientific novelty was
research,authorship, and/or publicationof thisarticle.
nottheprimaryobjective.
Work presented in this paper was supported by the Horizon
Intermsoffuturework,itwouldbeveryinterestinganduseful
2020 Research and Innovation Program of the European Union
torepeatsuchahackathoneventoncethespecificationshavebeen
under grant agreement 951938.
finalizedandaskfromtheparticipantstopresentupdatedsolutions
andtomotivatethemtocontinuetheworktowardasustainableset
ofinteroperabilitytoolstoeffectivelysupportthevastecosystemof
digitalhealthsolutionsaimingtowardchronicdiseasemanagement
Acknowledgments
andprevention(18).Moreover,thestandardizationofatleastsome
of these applications, would seal the success of this hackathon.
This work would not have been accomplished without the
Finally, the cooperation and possible integration with the EHDS
active involvement of HL7 Hellas, the Hellenic Ministry of
in future projects is expected to enhance the applicability of
Health, the participating teams, and all people involved in the
demonstrated proof of concepts developed across the EU at a
EEHRxF development process. The authors would like to
globalscale.
acknowledge the following persons for their contribution to the
X-eHealth project event, as well as the development of the
relevant guidelines and functional specifications: Karoline
Data availability statement
Buckow, Giorgio Cangioli, Milan Cabrnoch, Diogo Canudo, PG
Casali, Rebecca Ceder, Antoine Chaudieres, Catherine Chronaki,
Theoriginalcontributionspresentedinthestudyareincluded Juan Antonio de los Cobos, Sérgio Dinis, Pavla Doležalová, Sofia
inthearticle,furtherinquiriescanbedirectedtothecorresponding Franconi, Christof Gessner, Christine Haas, Klára Jiráková,
Daniel Karlson, Jiří Keller, Hynek Kružík, Patrick Marren,
author.
Marcello Melgara, Andries Nelissen, Gunnar Nordi, Niel Obrien,
Vanja Pajić, Esther Peelen, Vincent van Pelt, Cátia Pinto, Katre
Pruul, David Rodriguez, Irena Rubešová, Sara Russo, Eva
Ethics statement
Sabajova, Lucija Tepej Jocic, A Trama, Petr Tuma, Caitriona
Wray, Miroslav Zvolský. The authors would also like to thank all
Ethicalreviewandapprovalwasnotrequiredforthisstudyin volunteered in the preparation and demonstration of the
accordance with the national legislation and the institutional EEHRxF proof-of-concepts: DoctorNearYou (Fanis Zampetakis,
requirements. Written informed consent was not required to George Konstantakakis, Eleni Banasiou, Panos Kondilis, Markos
participate in this study in accordance with the national Katsoulakis, Maria Leontaraki, Harris Koukourakis, Nikos
legislationand theinstitutional requirements. Tsagkas, Giannis Sakkoulas, Kostas Thomas), GNOMON-TEAM
(Korina Papadopoulou, Kostas Karkaletsis, Nikos Mpampamis,
Prodromos Sarakinou, Vasiliki Georgakoudi, Domniki Melliou),
Author contributions HiSpin (Leandros Stefanopoulos, Vassilis Kilintzis, Eirini Lekka,
Nikos Maglaveras), iMedPhys-AUTH (Antonios Billis, Ilias
Kokkinidis, Paraskevas Lagakis, Evangelos Logaras), dm-RET
ER: Conceptualization, Project administration, Writing –
(George Del toro), Integrated Care Solutions (George
original draft. SK: Methodology, Software, Writing – original
Kavlentakis, Angelina Kouroubali, Vassilis Tzikoulis, Georgia
Magoufi), and eHealth4U (Prof. Constantinos Pattichis, Maria
Papaioannou, Andreas Neocleous, Panayiotis Savva, Constantinos
Yiasemi, Christos Michael, Ionut Christian Canciu, Maria Xyda,
Giorgos Adamides, Marios Neofytou, Antreas Panayides, Ioannis
27https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/101095594. Constantinou, ZinonasAntoniou, Francisco Miguel).
FrontiersinDigitalHealth 12 frontiersin.org
Rigasetal. 10.3389/fdgth.2023.1275711
Conflict of interest Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the
Author NK was employed by Apollo SA. Author ABe was
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated
employedby Gnomon Informatics SA.
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
The remaining authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed
orendorsed bythe publisher.
interest.
References
1.PapageorgiouV,TsaklidisG.Modelingofprematuremortalityratesfromchronic 11. Jussila J, Raitanen J, Suominen AH, Järvenpää A-M. Virtual hackathons—a
diseases in Europe, investigation of correlations, clustering, granger causality. novel approach for university-industry collaboration. In: Research and Innovation
CommunMathBiolNeurosci.(2021)2021.doi:10.28919/cmbn/5926 Forum2020:DisruptiveTechnologiesinTimesofChange.Springer(2021).p.247–57.
2. Suhrcke M, Nugent RA, Stuckler D, Rocco L. Chronic disease: an economic 12.VisramS,MohamedallyD,BassiD,BahadurU,StylianouC,MacNamaraJ,
perspective,Vol.11.London:OxfordHealthAlliance(2006). etal.47fhirworks2020:aninteroperabilityhackathonforahealthcareinformation
exchange.ArchDisChild.(2020)105:A16.doi:10.1136/archdischild-2020-gosh.47
3.KrausS,SchiavoneF,PluzhnikovaA,InvernizziAC.Digitaltransformationin
healthcare: analyzing the current state-of-research. J Bus Res. (2021) 123:557–67. 13.ChanT,McMurrayJ,LevyA,SveistrupH,WallaceJ.Post-hackathonlearning
doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2020.10.030 circles:supportingleanstartupdevelopment.InExtendedAbstractsofthe2020CHI
ch 4 a . lle Ir n o g j e u s, O r , es S o o l r u i t y i a o n ns A .I , n G t a J m In b n o o I v , A O p la p l l ek St e u J d . . I ( n 2 t 0 e 1 ro 3) pe 3 r ( a 1 b ) i : l 2 it 6 y 2– in 70 h . ealthcare:benefits, C fo o r n C fe o r m en p ce ut o in n g H M u a m ch a i n ne F ry ac ( t 2 o 0 rs 20 i ) n .p C . o 1 m – p 8 u . t d in o g i:1 Sy 0 s .1 te 1 m 45 s. /3 N 33 e 4 w 48 Y 0 o .3 rk 37 , 5 N 2 Y 16 : Association
14. Poncette A-S, Rojas P-D, Hofferbert J, Valera Sosa A, Balzer F, Braune K.
5. Lehne M, Sass J, Essenwanger A, Schepers J, Thun S. Why digital medicine
Hackathonsassteppingstonesinhealthcareinnovation:casestudywithsystematic
depends on interoperability. NPJ Digit Med. (2019) 2:79. doi: 10.1038/s41746-019-
recommendations.JMedInternetRes.(2020)22:e17004.doi:10.2196/17004
0158-1
15.SilverJK,BinderDS,ZubcevikN,ZafonteRD.Healthcarehackathonsprovide
6.KienzlerH,FontanesiC.Learningthroughinquiry:aglobalhealthhackathon.
TeachHighEduc.(2017)22:129–42.doi:10.1080/13562517.2016.1221805 e
re
d
c
u
o
c
m
at
m
io
e
n
n
a
d
l
at
a
io
n
n
d
s.J
in
M
no
ed
va
S
ti
y
o
s
n
t.(2
o
0
p
1
p
6
o
)
rt
4
u
0
n
:1
it
–
i
7
es
.
:
do
a
i:1
c
0
a
.1
se
007
s
/
t
s
u
1
d
0
y
916
a
-
n
0
d
16-
b
0
e
5
s
3
t
2-3
practice
7. hackseq Organizing Committee. hackseq: Catalyzing collaboration between
16.YarmohammadianMH,MonsefS,JavanmardSH,YazdiY,Amini-RaraniM.
biological, computational scientists via hackathon. F1000Research. (2017) 6:197.
The role of hackathon in education: can hackathon improve health and medical
doi:10.12688/f1000research.10964.2
education?JEducHealthPromot.(2021)10.doi:10.4103/jehp.jehp_1183_20
8. Briscoe G, Virani TE, Dima M. Hackathons: why co-location? Creativeworks
17.WangJK,RoySK,BarryM,ChangRT,BhattAS.Institutionalizinghealthcare
LondonWorkingPapers(2015).
hackathonstopromotediversityincollaborationinmedicine.BMCMedEduc.(2018)
9.BriscoeG.Digitalinnovation:thehackathonphenomenon(2014). 18:1–9.doi:10.1186/s12909-018-1385-x
10.MendesW,RichardA,TilloT-K,PintoG,GamaK,NolteA.Socio-technical 18. Nolte A, Chounta I-A, Herbsleb JD. What happens to all these hackathon
constraints, affordances of virtual collaboration-a studyof four online hackathons. projects?Identifyingfactorstopromotehackathonprojectcontinuation.ProcACM
ProcACMHum-ComputInteract.(2022)6:1–32.doi:10.1145/3555221 Hum-ComputInteract.(2020)4:1–26.doi:10.1145/3415216
FrontiersinDigitalHealth 13 frontiersin.org