Children’s experiences of information, advice, and support from
healthcare professionals when their parent has a cancer disease
Experiences from an oncological outpatient department
Abstract
Purpose: This study was carried out in order to evaluate children’s experiences after taking
part in the pilot clinical intervention “See Me” aimed at supporting children as relatives.
Method: A qualitative explorative design with interviews was chosen, with analyses using an
inductive approach. Interviews were conducted with 19 children (9 aged 7-12 years and 10
aged 13-18 years). The younger children were asked to draw a picture of a person in hospital,
using the Child Drawing: hospital (CD: H) instrument to measure the child’s level of anxiety.
The older children completed the Caring Professional Scale (CPS) as a measure of the caring
approach in their encounter with the nurse.
Results: The interviews with the children show that: they felt expected and welcome at the
hospital; they need knowledge about their parent’s situation; they need information and
participation based on their individual situation; and they need the nurse to offer them
information and support. The results from the pictures showed that one child had above-
average levels of anxiety. The older children reported that the nurses were Competent
Practitioners, but to a lesser degree that they were Compassionate Healers.
Conclusions: The results of this pilot study indicate that the structure of “See Me” could be
used as a starting point to ensure that children as relatives receive information, advice, and
support. Further the results indicate that both CD: H and CPS could be used to evaluated
children’s experiences of support when a parent has a long-term illness.
1
Key words: children as relatives, cancer, clinical intervention, support, Sweden
INTRODUCTION
Several studies have found that children of parents suffering from various diseases experience
mental ill-health, such as anxiety as well as emotional and behavioural problems, due to their
parent’s sickness (Appel et al., 2018; Bogosian et al., 2010; Davey et al., 2011; Jakobsen &
Christiansen, 2011; Krattenmacher et al., 2013; Kühne et al., 2012; Turner, 2004). Research
has shown that the child’s knowledge about what is happening to their parent is crucial for the
child’s mental health, wellbeing, and relationships (Davey et al., 2012). Parents describe a
lack of knowledge and ability regarding how to communicate with their children about their
cancer disease (Semple & McCaughan, 2013). Research has shown the importance of age-
appropriate information and communication with these children, as well as the significant role
of professionals in facilitating early interventions (Knutsson et al., 2008; Nilsson et al 2015;
Nolbris et al., 2010; Stinesen-Kollberg, et al., 2013; Turner, 2004). Receiving information
about the parent’s treatment and its side effects is described as crucial for a child’s possibility
to understand the parent’s situation and why he or she has acted in an unfamiliar way
(Maynard et al., 2013). Also, children have stated the need for support, manifested as listening
and understanding, encouragement and reassurance, tangible assistance, communication about
the disease, and engagement in normal life experiences (Wong et al., 2010), as well as
involvement in the patient’s and the family’s situation (Knutsson et al., 2008).
2
Even though it has been proven that children of parents with a disease need support, there is
no agreed-on programme for offering this support. Earlier studies have shown how healthcare
professionals fumble in their attempts to understand how to encounter children as relatives
and how to provide support (Golsäter et al., 2016; Karidar et al., 2016; Knutsson et al., 2017).
Further, the needs of these children are not clearly recognized and are often forgotten in the
clinical setting (Fearnley, 2012). There is, however, agreement regarding the need for a
systematic approach (Andersson et al., 2018; Knutsson et al., 2017), for instance based on
templates and manual procedures (Dencker et al., 2017). A family support project, including
meetings with parents and children and offering age-appropriate information, was found to be
helpful by both children (Bugge et al., 2008) and parents (Bugge et al., 2009). A literature
review (Järkestig Berggren & Hanson, 2013) based on 11 studies of methods for supporting
children whose parents have a serious physical illness demonstrated a lack of research in this
area, and none of the studies in the review had been carried out in a Swedish context. The
conclusion is that there is a need for further research, especially interventions evaluating the
effect of information, advice, and support provided to children (Järkestig Berggren & Hanson,
2013). Niemelä et al., 2010) argue that there is a need of studies using structured child-centred
interventions, which are furthermore easy to use in clinical practice.
PURPOSE
To evaluate children’s experiences after taking part in the pilot clinical intervention “See Me”
aimed at supporting children as relatives.
METHOD
Setting – the “See Me” intervention
An oncological outpatient department, threating different kind of cancer diseases, at a county
hospital in southern Sweden constitutes the setting for this study. At the department the most
3
common cancer disease in parents of young children was breast cancer. Based on Swedish
law stating that children’s needs for information, advice, and support must be considered by
the health services when their parent has a physical or mental illness or dies unexpectedly
(The Patient Safety Act 2010: 659 Chapter 6 § 5, 2010), the department has an ongoing
process to develop its work for children as relatives. As part of this process, a pilot version of
a clinical intervention “See Me” was developed, aimed at facilitating the identification of
children as relatives in order to shed light on a child’s situation and to provide opportunities
for the child to get information, advice, and support based on their individual situation and
needs (Fig 1). The pilot clinical intervention is based on earlier research (Bugge et al., 2008,
2009) and the researchers’ experience in the area, and was developed in collaboration with
researchers and nurses working at the outpatient department within the framework of the
“child dialogue”, an arena for developing healthcare for children in the county. The pilot
version of “See Me” intervention (Fig 1) consists of three phases: 1. Early identification, 2.
Encountering, and 3. Referral.
The “See Me” intervention can be described as a direct form of support for children and an
indirect form of support for parents, as a supplement to the information and support the
parents give their children. At this outpatient department each patient has a contact nurse who
has the main responsibility for the patient, and it is this nurse’s responsibility to encounter and
include their patients’ children.
The evaluation in this pilot study is focused on children’s experiences of the pilot version of
the intervention. Parents’ perceptions of their child’s participation in the intervention have
been published elsewhere (Golsäter et al., 2019).
4
Participants
Participants were children of one parent diagnosed with a cancer disease and being treated at
the oncological outpatient department. Patients with dependent children (up to 18 years of
age) were informed by their contact nurse about the study based on information from the
researcher, and received an information letter. The parents informed their children about the
study, and if a child was interested in participating the parent informed the researcher, who
then contacted the child.
At the time of the interview, the patient had been receiving treatment at the unit for at least
two months. In total the 17 families had 38 children, aged 4-18 years, and in 15 of the families
there were children aged seven years or older. Of the 34 children aged 7-18, 19 children from
11 families agreed to participate in the study. Of the participating children, nine were 7-12
years old (4 boys and 5 girls) and ten were 13-18 years old (7 girls and 3 boys). Of the parents
in the 11 families 10 had breast cancer.
Data collection and data analysis
All children were interviewed about their experiences of mainly the second part
“Encountering” of the pilot version of the clinical intervention “See Me” (Fig 1). The
younger children (7-12 years) were also asked to draw a picture of a person in hospital to
measure their level of anxiety. The older children completed the Caring Professional Scale
(CPS) as a measure of the caring approach in their encounter with the nurse.
The interviews
The interviews were conducted by the first author. Thirteen of the interviews were conducted
in the children’s home, one at the hospital, one at the researcher’s office, and the remaining
four by telephone. Based on earlier research (Golsäter et al., 2016; Golsäter et al., 2017;
5
Knutsson et al., 2008; Knutsson et al., 2017; Turner, 2004), an interview guide was
developed. To facilitate the construction of understandable questions adapted to the age
group, the questions were discussed with other researchers with experience of interviewing
children and adolescents (Docherty & Sandelowski, 1999; Elo et al., 2014; Wong et al.,
2010). The interview started with the question “Can you tell me about your encounters with
the nurses caring for your parent? Based on the child’s narratives, further questions were
asked about how they had experienced the information, advice, and support they had received.
To elaborate on the child’s experiences, probing questions such as “Can you describe
further?” were asked based on their descriptions (Docherty & Sandelowski, 1999; Kvale,
2014). The interviews, which were audio-recorded and transcribed, lasted 14-49 minutes
(median 25 min).
To analyse the interviews a qualitative content analysis according to Krippendorff (2004)
was used, and the inductive approach as described by Elo and Kyngas (2008) guided the
analysis process. In the first step, the interview transcripts were read by the three researchers
independently. During this reading process, notes and headings were written in the text as
codes. After reading and coding, the researchers discussed and compared the notes and codes.
The codes were first grouped into preliminary categories and then into subcategories based on
their similarities and differences. Thereafter, the subcategories were abstracted into four
generic categories based on their similarities and differences (Elo & Kyngas, 2008). During
the analysis process, the researchers discussed and explored the links between the categories
until consensus was reached.
Children’s reports of anxiety related to the hospital visits
Data were collected from the younger children (n=9) using the Child Drawing: Hospital
instrument (CD:H), to measure anxiety (Clatworthy et al., 1999). The child was given a blank
6
piece of paper and crayons in eight colours, and was asked to “draw a person in hospital”
according to the CD:H. This is an instrument designed and validated for use with children five
to 11 years of age for investigating experiences of anxiety in hospital (Clatworthy et al., 1999;
Wennström et al., 2011). However, one 12-year-old girl chose to answer the CPS
questionnaire like her older brother instead of drawing, resulting in eight drawings.
Adolescents’ reports of caring behaviours by the nurses
Caring behaviour was measured using the Caring Professional Scale (CPS) by Swanson
(Kalfoss & Owe, 2015; Swanson, 1991). This questionnaire consists of 15 items measuring
the two aspects Competent Practitioner (7 items) and Compassionate Healer (8 items).
Data on adolescents’ reports of caring behaviours by the nurses were collected from the older
children (n=10). One boy chose not to answer the questionnaire, and one of the younger
children (girl aged 12 years) chose the questionnaire instead of the drawing, resulting in ten
questionnaires.
Ethical consideration
Before each interview, the parents and children received both written and oral information
about the purpose of the study and how the interviews would be conducted. The information
letter and the interviewer, before the interview began, stated that participation was voluntary
and that the choice to participate or not would not influence the parent’s forthcoming care at
the unit. The study has been approved by the Ethical Committee at Linköping University:
2014/362-31.
7
FINDINGS
The interviews with the children show four generic categories: need to feel expected and
welcome at the hospital; need knowledge about their parent’s situation; need information and
participation based on their individual situation; and need the nurse to offer them information
and support (Figure 2).
Insert fig. 2 here
Need to feel expected and welcome at the hospital
The children described the nurses as kind and friendly, and as having a focus on them as
children as relatives. This positive approach, together with the nurses’ attempts to make the
environment as child-friendly as possible, contributed to the children’s feelings of security
when accompanying their parent to the hospital.
Kind and accommodating nurses
The children experienced a positive and optimistic atmosphere when they entered the
department. When greeting and welcoming the parent, the nurses also took the children into
account, which made the children feel included. When they were greeted in a positive and
friendly manner, the children perceived the nurses as kind, fun, and confident. They
experienced these actions as reducing their anxiety and fear:
“That they not only say hello to the mother and father but also see the child.
Saying hello and welcome.” (Child 9)
The children described the nurses as kind and accommodating.
8
Child-friendly hospital environment
The children experienced the hospital environment as a positive place. However, situations in
which the environment was experienced as a bit unfamiliar were also expressed. Concerns
about the physical environment as cold, boring, and scary were more prominent among the
younger children, who also explained that it could be hard to have to be still and quiet. Being
given something to play with, e.g. a syringe, was experienced as positive. The children also
described situations in which the nurses had given them a stuffed animal as a gift, which they
appreciated, and this reinforced their feelings of a child-friendly environment. They also
described being invited to the nurses’ lounge, or offered something to eat like biscuits or a
chocolate drink, as part of the child-friendly environment:
“You might get an ice cream or something to be happy. If you’re afraid of
them or something like that, then you get happy when you get something from
them.” (Child 5)
The children experienced the nurse’s way of talking with them in a nice and friendly manner
as another part of the child-friendly environment, and this helped them take the initiative
themselves to start talking to the nurse.
Need knowledge about their parent’s situation
Having the opportunity to meet the nurse who was caring for their parent and see that she was
competent increased the children’s confidence that the parent was being treated well. The
children described the value of talking directly to the person responsible for their parent’s
care, which was possible when they had the opportunity to talk with the parent’s contact
nurse.
Know that the parent is well taken care of
9
The children described that they felt confident in knowing that their parent was well taken
care of. When they saw that the nurses were kind and gentle towards their parent, they were
reassured that they could trust the nurses. They also mentioned getting a picture of the nurses’
competence as one way to feel comforted:
“She was kind and seemed to be careful with Mum, so it didn’t hurt. I think
that’s good”. (Child 3)
Older children expressed an overall impression of having trust in the nurses’ competence and
actions.
Participate and see what is happening in hospital
The children stressed the importance of being invited to visit the hospital and accompany their
parent for treatment and care; they wanted to see with their own eyes what was happening to
their parent. They mentioned the risk of growing afraid of what was happening to their parent
if they were not allowed to accompany them:
“You get scared if you don’t get to come.” (Child 9)
“I think it's good to be at the hospital and understand what's going on.” (Child
8)
These feelings were most prominent at the beginning of the parent’s cancer trajectory. Some
children described feeling forced to be engaged in the parent’s illness, and stressed that being
involved in the treatment and care should be voluntary.
Being encountered by the nurse caring for their parent
The children appreciated being encountered by the same nurse who was caring for their
parent. They wanted information and answers to their questions from someone who knew
their parent, in order to get valid information and be able to ask questions about the individual
parent’s situation, treatment and care:
10
“Tell me what they're doing.” (Child 5)
They pointed out a need for guidance in order to understand their parent’s situation, and
wanted this information from a nurse with knowledge of the parent’s situation and care whom
they knew and had met before. The children stated that they were afraid of meeting with
unknown adults, and that they did not feel comfortable talking to an unknown nurse alone.
Need information and participation based on their individual situation
To be able to take advantage of information, the children argued that it needs to be adapted to
their individual needs. They described it as important that nurses are trained in how to talk to
children of different ages, and skilled enough to know that the child has understood.
Adaptation based on age and experience
In the interviews the children pointed out that everyone is different, and that they experience a
need for individualized and age-appropriate approaches. Children with a great deal of hospital
experience expressed that they wanted an experience-based approach from the nurses. They
expressed a desire for something for them as well, that could distract them from their feelings
about waiting and that they could have fun with. For example, there were toys at the hospital,
but the older children perceived these to be more suitable for young children:
“Some activities for children, so the kids don’t have to wait, and a playroom
for both older and younger children. But there’s mainly baby stuff.” (Child 3)
They wanted the nurses to be able to provide information adjusted to the child’s age and
experience, as well as on an individual basis related to their parent’s situation.
An educational approach
11
Children stated that it was important that the staff use an educational approach when talking
with them. They wanted the staff to talk in a teaching manner to help them understand. They
also stressed the importance of having a good layout for the information, and of being skilled
in explaining in a way the children can understand:
“I understood that she wasn’t so briefed on my mother's situation / / she
wasn’t as proficient as the doctor, but I understood that.” (Child 15)
The children also pointed out the need for repeated information related to new aspects in their
parent’s disease trajectory.
Need the nurse to offer them information and support
The children described a need to have guidance in finding information that is credible, not
only about their parent’s disease but also about how to get further support if needed.
Additionally, they described the need to be offered a well-balanced mix of individual- and
family-based support.
Help in finding credible information
In the interviews, the children stated that there is a great deal of information available, but that
they experience that they need help in finding information that is credible. They had received
brochures, and knew how to find further information on the Internet. However, they
experienced that they had not used this source to any great extent and explained that all the
information on the web is not valid or useful to them, and that it is hard to sort out the credible
information:
“If you have any questions you can google it? But I haven’t done it.” (Child 3)
The children experienced that they relied to a high extent on adults, especially their own
parents, to find the right information and support for them. This could involve, for example,
12
informing the school health services about the child’s need for support. They expressed
trusting that their parents had received information from the nurse about how to support them:
“It's the parents who decide to some extent what the children get to know,
that's how it is.” (Child 4)
Children mentioned worrying that their parents might not have enough knowledge themselves
to transfer to them, or that their parents might not want them to know everything and thus
held back information.
Well-balanced mix between individual- and family-based support
According to the value of sharing feelings and information among the family members, the
children had mixed feelings. On the one hand, they stated that it is good to know how others
in the family think. Having family meetings with the nurses could also form a bond in the
family and offer a way to understand each other, as well as help them interpret the
information provided. On the other hand, the child might not be completely forthcoming in
family meetings, as they might not want to speak for themselves, and the conversation might
not be the same if the whole family is included:
“There were several of us in the family who heard the same information.”
(Child 13)
“It's a bit awkward when adults start talking because you don’t have so much
to do yourself, but if the doctors only speak with Mum then I can’t talk to
them.” (Child 3)
Another difficulty the children mentioned concerned integrity within the family: you might
not want everyone to know everything about each other. It seems as if the older children
preferred to talk to the staff by themselves, while the younger children preferred to be
accompanied by other family members.
13
Not having to ask for support themselves
The children in this study stressed the importance of having someone to talk to, especially at
the beginning of the parent’s disease trajectory. The children’s experience was that their
parents needed to focus on the parent who was sick, and therefore tended to forget the child.
The children experienced a need for support from someone not involved in the parent’s
illness, treatment, and care. Children who had experience of support and comfort from the
school health services, such as the school nurse, social worker, or psychologist appreciated
this. However, the children stated that someone, such as their parents or the hospital nurse,
has to make their needs known to the school health services. The children experienced that the
nurses at the hospital had not offered any strategies for support; instead, they had to ask for
support themselves:
They’ve never asked me or my sister directly if we need help or to talk to
someone. (Child 11)
The children experienced that they were forced to take the initiative themselves and ask for
help; otherwise, they received none.
Children’s reports of anxiety related to the hospital visits
The anxiety score, measured using the Child Drawing: Hospital instrument (CD:H), ranged
from 34 to 159. The analysis in this study showed that the eight children aged 7-12 years
scored 38-135 (md 61). Seven of the children experienced low levels of anxiety (fig 3.), and
one child had above-average levels.
Insert fig 3 here
14
Adolescents’ reports of caring behaviours by the nurses
In their answers to the CPS, the adolescents (n=10) acknowledged that the nurses were
(absolutely=median 1) Caring, Clinically competent, Respectful, and Technically skilled, the
aspects of a Competent Practitioner. However, the adolescents did not find the nurses to be
(not at all/sometimes=median 4-5) Centred on you, Visibly touched by your experience,
Aware of your feelings, or Able to offer hope, the aspects of a Compassionate Healer.
DISCUSSION
The findings show that the children felt expected and welcome at the hospital, and that they
needed knowledge about their parent’s situation based on their individual situation. They also
needed the nurse to offer them information and support. The results of the drawings showed
that only one child had above-average levels of anxiety related to hospital visits. The older
children’s answers to the CPS reflected that they perceived the nurses as Competent
Practitioners but to a lesser degree as Compassionate Healers.
When looking at the findings of the present study in relation to the structure of the pilot
version of the clinical intervention “See Me”, some parts suggest that the nurses are largely
working according to the intervention and that it also corresponds to what the children
describe as helpful to them. For example, the children described feeling welcome and safe
when accompanying their parent to the department, and that the nurses showed an interest in
meeting them. On the other hand, there are parts in which the children described that they
needed more information and support than they experienced that they received. They also
gave clear descriptions of how the intervention can be elaborated and of how the nurses could
act to better meet the children’s needs. To further elaborate and refine this pilot intervention,
to better meet the needs of children as relatives, the discussion are based on an attempt to
15
combine the children’s descriptions of their needs with the structure of the present version of
the clinical intervention “See Me”. This attempt is described in figure 4, and the results will
be discussed based on this figure.
Insert fig. 4 here
Need to feel expected and welcome at the hospital
The nurses were experienced as kind and friendly, and together with their attempts to make
the environment as child-friendly as possible, this contributed to the children’s feelings of
security. Looking at the drawings, only one child reported an above-average level of anxiety.
Also, in the older children’s ratings on the CPS, the nurses were shown to be experienced as
caring and understanding. Despite the small sample, the results from the drawings and
questionnaires together with the children’s descriptions could be understood as reflections of
their feeling welcome and safe when accompanying their parents to the hospital. These results
indicate that the nurses have managed to develop their clinical practice when encountering
children as relatives, in contrast to earlier studies showing how nurses fumble in their attempts
to encounter children as relatives (Golsäter et al., 2016; Karidar et al., 2016; Knutsson et al.,
2017; Tafjord, 2019). Also, children in Finch and Gibson (2009) described experiencing
anxiety when going to the hospital and perceived that they, as children as relatives, had no
place at the hospital, in contrast to the children in the present study. Inviting the children to
come to the hospital could be seen as the first step in gaining access to them and through this,
in collaboration with their parents, having the possibility to give the children further
information and support based on their own situation, in line with the intention of the law on
children as relatives (The Patient Safety Act 2010: 659 Chapter 6 § 5, 2010).
Need knowledge about their parent’s situation
16
When they had the possibility to see that their parent was well taken care of by competent and
kind nurses, the children felt comforted. Having knowledge of what is happening to their
parent during treatment is crucial for the child’s mental health, wellbeing and relations
(Davey et al., 2012; Maynard et al., 2013). Children have described that their need for
information during a parent’s illness trajectory varies over time, but in the initial stage they
mainly want to have information about the treatment and examinations (Kennedy & Lloyd-
Williams, 2009). This is in line with the children in the present study experiencing that being
present at the hospital was most prominent in the beginning. Via the CPS, the older children
in the present study described that they to a large extent found the nurses to be clinically
competent and technically skilled, and this could be understood as the nurses having fulfilled
the children’s need for information about the treatment and examinations in the initial phase
of their parent’s illness trajectory. Having access to a nurse with knowledge about their
parents’ specific situation was described as prerequisite for getting the information they
wanted, and is in line with children’s experiences in Kennedy and Lloyd-Williams (2009).
Adolescents in Bartfai Jansson and Anderzén-Carlsson (2017) describe the ability to see how
their parent’s treatment was carried out and to get more knowledge about the cancer as useful.
Need information and participation based on their individual situation
The children argue for individual-based information and support based on what they as an
individual child want, in line with the children in Kristjanson et al., (2004). In order to fulfil
this wish, according to the children in the present study, nurses need to have knowledge in
encountering children and be skilled at being aware of whether and how a child has
understood the information and the situation involving a sick parent. Drawings have shown to
be a useful approach when conducting interviews with children (Søndergaard & Reventlow,
17
2019), and the Child Drawing: Hospital instrument might also be useful in clinical practice in
order to further explore children’s feelings in the situation but also as a way to ease the
conversation with younger children.
The nurses in Tafjord (2019) describe a need for more knowledge about children’s
development in order to talk to and inform them about a parent’s disease. When they lack
knowledge, this can hinder them in approaching the children, causing the children to be left
alone. The children in the present study described sometimes needing to ask for support
themselves, which could also be based on the nurses sometimes being hesitant in approaching
them. Earlier research has shown that children, particularly adolescents, sometimes want to
protect their parents and therefore do not tell them about their feelings (Bugge et al., 2008),
which highlights the need to offer children meetings with the nurses on their own. Children
taking part in a support programme for children with a parent with cancer describe first
having felt a bit frightened to talk on their own with professionals, as they did not know them,
but afterwards feeling boosted and appreciating the opportunity to talk to someone outside the
family (Bugge et al., 2008). The children in the present study also described insecurity in
talking to an unknown nurse on their own. According to these children, as well as the children
in Kennedy and Lloyd-Williams (2009), it is important to get information about the disease
and treatment from a nurse with knowledge about the parent’s specific situation. However, if
there is a need for further support there might be other healthcare professionals the children
can talk to.
Need the nurse to offer them further support if required
It could be asked to what extent the nurses working at the hospital should be the only ones
caring for children as relatives. However, the nurses caring for the parent must, in cooperation
18
with the parents, try to explore whether the child needs further support in handling the
situation of illness in the family. One way to manage this (explore the need of further
support), according to the children’s descriptions in the present study, is to offer family
meetings at which the whole family together can talk with a nurse. On the other hand, family
meetings might hinder especially adolescents from talking about their feelings in order to
protect their parents. These contradictory descriptions shed light on the need to try to explore
the individual needs of each child in order to offer referral for appropriate support.
The results from the present study highlight the need to create structures through which
children can be referred for further support if needed. In Sweden, school nurses are situated in
the schools, and can be one healthcare professional to whom children have access. School
nurses have described that they can be one part in supporting children with illness in the
family; however, to be able to do this, they need to collaborate with the nurses caring for the
parent at the hospital in order to recognize these children (Golsäter et al., 2017). In such a
collaboration the school nurse, who has the opportunity for a more long-lasting and trustful
relationship with the child, could further explore the child’s needs of support. Further, this
more long-lasting relationship could enable the school nurse, to a greater extent than the nurse
caring for the parent, to provide care based on the aspects of a Compassionate Healer
(Centred on you, Visibly touched by your experience, Aware of your feelings, and Able to
offer hope) (Kalfoss & Owe, 2015; Wei et al., 2017). However, to be able to meet the child’s
needs, the nurses caring for the sick parent must improve their caring competences. Based on
the findings of the present study, in which the older children reported the nurses as being
Competent Practitioners but to a lesser degree, Compassionate Healers, especially the aspects
of the Compassionate Healer need to be elaborated. To be able to care for children as
relatives, as well as all patients and their relatives, regardless of which healthcare settings they
are working in nurses need to continuously develop their caring approach.
19
Discussion of the method
Research involving children and adolescents is not without its methodological challenges, one
of them involving the different worlds of adult- and childhood (Kirk, 2007). The interviewer
in this study is a paediatric nurse with long experience of encountering children and has
previously performed several individual and group interviews with children, which was
helpful when conducting the interviews. Researchers are discussing the value of parents’
participation during interviews with younger children (Gardner & Randall, 2012), and
Gardner and Randall (2012) suggest that the interviewer should be flexible and adapt to the
situation based on the child’s wishes. This was applied in the present study in order to make
the children feel as safe as possible. In some of the interviews the parent was present or in a
room nearby, or siblings chose to be interviewed together; additionally, four of the
adolescents chose to be interviewed by telephone. As the interviewer experienced it, there
were no differences regarding the data collected using the different ways of conducting the
interviews.
The study was designed as heterogenic to include children with a parent who had any cancer
diagnosis, so that the findings could be transferable to all children as relatives (Polit & Beck,
2012). However, it is with one exception the voices of children of mothers with breast cancer
that are heard in this study, which is a significant limitation and has to be considered when
transferring the results to other groups of children with parents with other cancer diagnoses or
a long-term illness in the family.
The data analysis was performed through ongoing discussion between the three researchers, in
order to ensure trustworthiness of the findings (Elo et al., 2014). To further support the
analytic results, quotations from the interviews are presented (Polit & Beck, 2012).
20
The CD: H instrument was used to measure the children’s level of anxiety, previously to the
best of our knowledge only used in situations where the child were the patient at hospital,
which could be seen as an limitation. However, the results showing one child with an above-
average level of anxiety are in line with the results of the interviews. This may indicate that
the CD: H instrument could also be used in clinical practice with children as relatives and in
further studies to evaluate the effect of clinical interventions for children as relatives. But as
the sample in this pilot study was small it is not possible to draw valid conclusions. Also
according to the CPS, the scale was not earlier used in this context, which could be seen as a
limitation. The results from the CPS are in line with the results from the interviews, which
could also be interpreted as suggesting that the instrument can be used in larger studies to
evaluate adolescents’ experiences of caring interventions. Further assessment-tools have their
limitations when it comes to validation of the tool, to explore and understand people's
experiences in more detail and who’s actually answering the tool (Polit & Beck, 2012). To
more in-depth explore and understand children’s experiences of information, advice, and
support when their parents have a cancer disease observations of encounters between children
and health care professionals could be used in future studies (Polit & Beck, 2012).
Conclusions
The findings show that the children felt expected and welcome at the hospital. The results of
this pilot study indicate that the structure of “See Me” could be used as a starting point to
ensure that children as relatives receive information, advice, and support in accordance with
the law, in a way that is possible to implement in clinical practice. However, through the
interviews, suggestions and recommendations emerged, regarding how to further elaborate
and refine this intervention of “See Me” to even better meet the needs of children as relatives
in the encounter with healthcare professionals. Further improvements to the nurses’ caring
competences – especially the aspects of the Compassionate Healer – are needed to enable for
21
the nurses to encountering children as relatives and at the same time care for their patients, the
parent. Also structures for collaboration with and referral to other healthcare professionals
need to be elaborated to facilitate for the nurse’s possibility to care for both their patients and
the patients’ children. Results from this study can be used in a future full scale intervention
study and also in educational interventions for health care professionals as well as in
supporting organizational structures to care for children as relatives in different parts of the
health care system.
Acknowledgements
We would like to express our warm and sincere gratitude to the children and adolescents who
kindly participated in the interviews.
22
References
Andersson, A.-C., Melke, A., Andersson Gäre, B., & Golsäter, M. (2018). Identification of Children as Relatives
With a Systematic Approach; a Prerequisite in Order to Offer Advice and Support. Quality
Management in Healthcare, 27(3), 172-177. doi:10.1097/qmh.0000000000000181
Appel, C. W., Frederiksen, K., Hjalgrim, H., Dyregrov, A., Dalton, S. O., Dencker, A., . . . Envold Bidstrup, P.
(2018). Depressive symptoms and mental health-related quality of life in adolescence and young
adulthood after early parental death. Scandinavian Journal of Public Health, 0(0), 1403494818806371.
doi:10.1177/1403494818806371
Bartfai Jansson, K., & Anderzén-Carlsson, A. (2017). Adolescents’ Perspectives of Living With a Parent’s Cancer:
A Unique and Personal Experience. Cancer Nursing, 40(2), 94-101.
doi:10.1097/ncc.0000000000000358
Bogosian, A., Moss-Morris, R., & Hadwin, J. (2010). Psychosocial adjustment in children and adolescents with a
parent with multiple sclerosis: a systematic review. Clinical Rehabilitation, 24(9), 789-801.
doi:10.1177/0269215510367982
Bugge, K. E., Helseth, S., & Darbyshire, P. (2008). Children's experiences of participation in a family support
program when their parent has incurable cancer. Cancer Nursing, 31(6), 426-434.
Bugge, K. E., Helseth, S., & Darbyshire, P. (2009). Parents’ experiences of a Family Support Program when a
parent has incurable cancer. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 18(24), 3480-3488.
Clatworthy, S., Simon, K., & Tiedeman, M. E. (1999). Child Drawing: Hospital—An instrument designed to
measure the emotional status of hospitalized school-aged children. Journal of Pediatric Nursing, 14(1),
2-9. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0882-5963(99)80054-2
Davey, M., Kissil, K., Lynch, L., Harmon, L.-R., & Hodgson, N. (2012). Lessons Learned in Developing a Culturally
Adapted Intervention for African-American Families Coping with Parental Cancer. Journal of Cancer
Education, 27(4), 744-751. doi:10.1007/s13187-012-0398-0
Davey, M. P., Tubbs, C. Y., Kissil, K., & Niño, A. (2011). ‘We are survivors too’: African-American youths'
experiences of coping with parental breast cancer. Psycho-Oncology, 20(1), 77-87.
doi:10.1002/pon.1712
Dencker, A., Rix, B. A., Bøge, P., & Tjørnhøj-Thomsen, T. (2017). A qualitative study of doctors' and nurses'
barriers to communicating with seriously ill patients about their dependent children. Psycho-Oncology,
26(12), 2162-2167. doi:10.1002/pon.4440
Docherty, S., & Sandelowski, M. (1999). Focus on qualitative methods: Interviewing children. Research in
Nursing & Health, 22(2), 177-185. doi:10.1002/(sici)1098-240x(199904)22:2<177::Aid-nur9>3.0.Co;2-h
Elo, S., & Kyngas, H. (2008). The qualitative content analysis process. J Adv Nurs., 62(1), 107-115.
Elo, S., Kääriäinen, M., Kanste, O., Pölkki, T., Utriainen, K., & Kyngäs, H. (2014). Qualitative content analysis.
SAGE open, 4(1), 2158244014522633.
Fearnley, R. (2012). Supporting children when a parent has a life-threatening illness: The role of the community
practitioner. Community Practitioner, 85(12), 22-25.
Finch, A., & Gibson, F. (2009). How do young people find out about their parent's cancer diagnosis: A
phenomenological study. European Journal of Oncology Nursing, 13(3), 213-222.
Gardner, H., & Randall, D. (2012). The effects of the presence or absence of parents on interviews with
children. Nurse Researcher, 19(2), 6-10.
Golsäter, M., Enskär, K., & Knutsson, S. (2017). Contributing to making the school a safe place for the child:
School nurses’ perceptions of their assignment when caring for children having parents with serious
physical illness. Nursing Open, 4(4), 267-273. doi:doi:10.1002/nop2.92
Golsäter, M., Enskär, K., & Knutsson, S. (2019). Parents’ perceptions of how nurses care for children as relatives
of an ill patient- Experiences from an oncological outpatient department. European Journal of
Oncology Nursing, 39, 35-40. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejon.2019.01.004
Golsäter, M., Henricson, M., Enskär, K., & Knutsson, S. (2016). Are children as relatives our responsibility?
&#x2013; How nurses perceive their role in caring for children as relatives of seriously ill patients.
European Journal of Oncology Nursing, 25, 33-39. doi:10.1016/j.ejon.2016.09.005
Jakobsen, I. S., & Christiansen, E. (2011). Young people’s risk of suicide attempts in relation to parental death: a
population-based register study. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 52(2), 176-183.
doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.2010.02298.x
23
Järkestig Berggren, U., & Hanson, E. (2013). Barn som är anhöriga till föräldrar med allvarlig fysisk sjukdom eller
skada. En kunskapsöversikt om metoder för att ge stöd till barn. In Swedish Retrieved from Nationellt
Kompetenscentrum barn som anhöriga NKA:
Kalfoss, M., & Owe, J. (2015). Empirical Verification of Swanson¡¯s Caring Processes Found in Nursing Actions:
Systematic Review. Open Journal of Nursing, Vol.05No.11, 11. doi:10.4236/ojn.2015.511104
Karidar, H., Åkesson, H., & Glasdam, S. (2016). A gap between the intention of the Swedish law and interactions
between nurses and children of patients in the field of palliative oncology &#x2013; The perspective of
nurses. European Journal of Oncology Nursing, 22, 23-29. doi:10.1016/j.ejon.2016.01.005
Kennedy, V. L., & Lloyd-Williams, M. (2009). Information and communication when a parent has advanced
cancer. Journal of Affective Disorders, 114(1), 149-155.
Kirk, S. (2007). Methodological and ethical issues in conducting qualitative research with children and young
people: A literature review. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 44(7), 1250-1260.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2006.08.015
Knutsson, S., Enskär, K., Andersson-Gäre, B., & Golsäter, M. (2017). Children as relatives to a sick parent:
Healthcare professionals’ approaches. Nordic Journal of Nursing Research, 37(2), 61-69.
doi:10.1177/2057158516662538
Knutsson, S., Samuelsson, I. P., Hellström, A.-L., & Bergbom, I. (2008). Children’s experiences of visiting a
seriously ill/injured relative on an adult intensive care unit. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 61(2), 154-
162. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2648.2007.04472.x
Krattenmacher, T., Kühne, F., Führer, D., Beierlein, V., Brähler, E., Resch, F., . . . Möller, B. (2013). Coping skills
and mental health status in adolescents when a parent has cancer: A multicenter and multi-
perspective study. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 74(3), 252-259.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychores.2012.10.003
Krippendorff, K. (2004). Content analysis: An introduction to its methodology. Thousand Oaks: Ca:Sage.
Kristjanson, L. J., Chalmers, K. I., & Woodgate, R. (2004). Information and support needs of adolescent children
of women with breast cancer. Paper presented at the Oncology nursing forum.
Kvale, S. B., S. (2014). Den kvalitativa forskningsintervjun (3:ed ed.). Lund: Studentlitteratur.
Kühne, F., Krattenmacher, T., Bergelt, C., Ernst, J. C., Flechtner, H.-H., Führer, D., . . . Möller, B. (2012). Parental
palliative cancer: psychosocial adjustment and health-related quality of life in adolescents
participating in a German family counselling service. BMC Palliative Care, 11(1), 21. doi:10.1186/1472-
684X-11-21
Maynard, A., Patterson, P., McDonald, F. E., & Stevens, G. (2013). What is helpful to adolescents who have a
parent diagnosed with cancer? Journal of psychosocial oncology, 31(6), 675-697.
Niemelä, M., Väisänen, L., Marshall, C., Hakko, H., & Räsänen, S. (2010). The Experiences of Mental Health
Professionals Using Structured Family-Centered Interventions to Support Children of Cancer Patients.
Cancer Nursing, 33(6), E18-E27. doi:10.1097/NCC.0b013e3181ddfcb5
Nilsson, S., Björkman, B., Almqvist, A.-L., Almqvist, L., Björk-Willén, P., Donohue, D., . . . Hvit, S. (2015).
Children’s voices – Differentiating a child perspective from a child’s perspective. Developmental
Neurorehabilitation, 18(3), 162-168. doi:10.3109/17518423.2013.801529
Nolbris, M., Abrahamsson, J., Hellström, A.-L., Olofsson, L., & Enskär, K. (2010). The experience of therapeutic
support groups by siblings of children with cancer. Pediatric Nursing, 36(6), 298-304; quiz 305.The
patient Safety Act 2010: 659 Chapter 6 § 5. (2010). Sweden
Polit, D., & Beck, C. (2012). Nursing research (9 th ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Semple, C. J., & McCaughan, E. (2013). Family life when a parent is diagnosed with cancer: impact of a
psychosocial intervention for young children. European Journal of Cancer Care, 22(2), 219-231.
doi:10.1111/ecc.12018
Stinesen-Kollberg, K., Thorsteinsdottir, T., Wilderäng, U., & Steineck, G. (2013). Worry about one's own
children, psychological well-being, and interest in psychosocial intervention. Psycho-Oncology, 22(9),
2117-2123. doi:10.1002/pon.3266
Swanson, K. M. (1991). Empirical Development of a Middle Range Theory of Caring. Nursing Research, 40(3),
161-165.
Søndergaard, E., & Reventlow, S. (2019). Drawing as a Facilitating Approach When Conducting Research Among
Children. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 18, 1609406918822558.
doi:10.1177/1609406918822558
Tafjord, T. (2019). Recognition of Insufficient Competence—Nurses’ Experiences in Direct Involvement With
Adolescent Children of Cancer Patients. Cancer Nursing, Publish Ahead of Print.
doi:10.1097/ncc.0000000000000646
24
Turner, J. (2004). Children's and family needs of young women with advanced breast cancer: A review.
Palliative and Supportive Care,, 2(1), 55 - 64. doi:10.1017/S1478951504040076
Wei, H., Roscigno, C. I., & Swanson, K. M. (2017). Healthcare providers' caring: Nothing is too small for parents
and children hospitalized for heart surgery. Heart & Lung, 46(3), 166-171.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrtlng.2017.01.007
Wennström, B., Nasic, S., Hedelin, H., & Bergh, I. (2011). Evaluation of the Swedish version of the Child
Drawing: Hospital Manual. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 67(5), 1118-1128. doi:10.1111/j.1365-
2648.2010.05550.x
Wong, M., Ratner, J., Gladstone, K., Davtyan, A., & Koopman, C. (2010). Children’s Perceived Social Support
After a Parent Is Diagnosed with Cancer. Journal of Clinical Psychology in Medical Settings, 17(2), 77-
86. doi:10.1007/s10880-010-9187-2
25
1. Early identificatio; As soon as possible after parent has been enrolled
•Earlyidentificationof children as relatives
•Information aboutchild'ssituation whena parenthas a cancer disease
•Invitation tobringthe childtothe hospital and offer information
2. Encountering; When parent gives permission for child to visit
department
•The childvisits the department
•A firstmeeting withthe childtogetherwiththe parentfor information aboutthe parent'sillnessand
situation
•Offer the childan individualmeeting withthe nurse
•Follow-upconversationwithchild and parents
3. Referral; Children who need further support
•Oneor twoadditionalmeetings withthe childat whichthe nurseprovides information and advice
•Referralfor furthersupport ifneeded
Figure 1 Overview of the pilot version of the clinical intervention See Me
Kind and accommodating
nurses Need to feel
expected and
welcome at the
Child-friendly hospital hospital
environment
Know that the parent is
well taken care of
Need knowledge
Participate and see what is
about their parent’s
happening in hospital
situation
Being encountered by the
nurse caring for their
parent
Adaptation based on age
and experience Need information
and participation
based on their
individual situation
An educational approach
Help in finding credible
information
Need the nurse to
Well-balanced mix offer them
between individual-and
information and
family-based support
support
Not having to ask for
support themselves
Figure 2 Presentation of the categories and the sub-categories
Need to feel expected
•Create a child-centred approach, by asking about the child and always noticing that the child has come to the
and welcome at the hospital.
•Create a child-friendly environment, with activities and toys for children of different ages.
hospital
Need knowledge about
•Make appointments and encourage children to visit the hospital.
•Make the nurse caring for the parent is the primary source of information for the child.
their parent’s situation
•Base the information on the sick parent’s own disease, treatment, and care.
Need information and
•Make sure that the nurses have education and training in how to carry out encounters with children.
participation based on •Create a thought-through information strategy, with valid and available brochures, films, and web material.
•Identify the child’s interests, knowledge, needs, and questions by asking the child him or herself.
their individual situation •Customize the information based on the specific child’s knowledge and needs.
Need the nurse to offer
•Create a structure through which children can be referred to, e.g., school healthcare.
•Anchor information and support with the parents.
them information and
•Offer both family and individual sessions based on the child’s needs and wishes.
•Be active in providing support or pointing out who can offer it.
support if required
•Help the child get into contact with the referring organization.
Figure 4. Suggestions for how to carry out clinical practice to support children as relatives in
oncology care, based on the children’s statements.