Current Research in Medical Sciences
ISSN 2958-0390
www.pioneerpublisher.com/crms
Volume 3 Number 1 March 2024
A Study of the Current Status of Rehabilitation
Intervention in the Clinical Recovery of Stroke
Patients
Fangyu Zhao1
1 The First Clinical Medical School, Shanxi Medical University, Shanxi, China
Correspondence: Fangyu Zhao, The First Clinical Medical School, Shanxi Medical University,
Shanxi, China.
doi:10.56397/CRMS.2024.03.12
Abstract
At the present stage, rehabilitation therapy, as a comprehensive recovery aid, promotes the recovery
effect of stroke patients, and plays an indispensable value in helping patients to recover function and
improve the quality of life. The overall trend of the intervention of rehabilitation therapy in stroke is
favourable, and it is an effective treatment for stroke patients to be assisted by rehabilitation therapy
based on independent clinical treatment with Western medicine, independent clinical treatment with
Chinese medicine, or combined treatment with Chinese and Western medicine. This advantage is still
prominent for stroke patients in different periods. However, the degree of intervention of
rehabilitation therapy in stroke is still unsatisfactory, as the patient’s willingness, the support of family
strength, the imbalance of medical resources, and the limitations of the level of science and technology
are the reasons for the limitation, which affects that the functional value of rehabilitation therapy is
not fully realised in the recovery process of the patients with stroke, and this makes the development
of rehabilitation therapy in the intervention of stroke a long way to go.
Keywords: rehabilitation, stroke, cause of limitation, value functioning
1. Introduction this study aims to explore the current situation
of rehabilitation therapy intervention in force
With the development of society and economy
trauma recovery of stroke patients, analyse the
and the ageing of the population, the incidence
existing problems, and provide a basis for
and disability rate of stroke is on the rise year by
optimizing the rehabilitation therapy program
year, bringing a heavy burden to individuals,
and improving the effect of rehabilitation
families and society. Rehabilitation therapy is an
therapy.
important part of stroke recovery, which is
significant for improving patients’ dysfunction 2. Rehabilitation Intervention Situation of
and quality of life. However, there are many Stroke
problems with the current status of
A questionnaire survey of stroke patients in a
rehabilitation therapy intervention in the clinical
tertiary care hospital was conducted to collect
recovery of stroke patients in China. Therefore,
93
Current Research in Medical Sciences
basic information about the patients, and angioplasty or stenting to assist some
statistics were made on the related diseases, anticoagulant, anti-spasmodic, anti-platelet
whether rehabilitation was intervened, first or aggregation, as well as antihypertensive,
recurrent, age, and family size. There were 281 lipid-lowering and other cerebrovascular
stroke patients, 169 men and 112 women, with a medications to restore cerebral vascular
mean age of (60.21 ± 10.12) years. The survey smoothness, is not enough to completely restore
showed that those who were older and did not the damaged neurological function of the
receive rehabilitation treatment had poorer subsequent stage of stroke patients. Relevant
functional recovery and lower social studies indicate that the degree of recovery of
participation. neurological deficits as a comparative standard,
the quantitative stroke patients were randomly
2.1 The Effect of Rehabilitation Therapy Combined
divided into two groups, one group as a
with Different Clinical Treatment Modalities
conventional treatment group, one group for
Presented
rehabilitation therapy intervened in the
2.1.1 The Effect of Western Clinical Treatment
conventional treatment of rehabilitation therapy
Combined with Rehabilitation Therapy on
group, statistics of the number of people in the
Stroke
two groups, age, disease, gender and the degree
Stroke patients suffer from different degrees of of neurological deficits, after a series of recovery
neurological dysfunction such as speech sessions as shown in Table 1. The results show
disorder, motor disorder, and cognitive that the conventional group of Western medicine
impairment. Western clinical treatment can drug treatment recovery rate and neuromotor
effectively control the development of the and other functions were significantly lower
disease, but only through basic Western than those of the rehabilitation therapy group.
Table 1.
Group Before treatment 28d after treatment 45d after treatment
Rehabilitation group 22.9±6.64 13.56±8.52 9.17±8.20
Conventional group 23.03±7.61 18.13±8.87 16.03±8.38
p >0.05 < 0.05 < 0.05
Western medicine treatment of stroke patients is other TCM treatments can play an effective and
often accompanied by a variety of comorbidities positive role in the recovery of limb function of
and sequelae in the late stage, the rate of stroke patients. Taking acupuncture, massage
occurrence of more muscle strength loss, muscle and acupressure combined with rehabilitation
atrophy, muscle stiffness, etc., the situation is therapy as an example, the improvement of limb
more serious will cause patients to lose the mobility and daily life level of patients in the
ability to live independently. For stroke patients late stage of stroke was analysed accordingly,
with related conditions, rehabilitation therapy and the recovery of stroke patients with
can provide appropriate physiotherapy methods rehabilitation training alone as the control group
for targeted intervention and control, and future was compared with that of stroke patients with
research can further explore the specific rehabilitation therapy combined with
mechanisms of Western medicine combined acupuncture, massage and acupressure
with rehabilitation therapy, optimise the programme as the observation group, excluding
treatment plan and further improve the the effects of other irrelevant factors, as shown
therapeutic effect. in Table 2. The study showed that acupuncture
combined with rehabilitation therapy was more
2.1.2 Effectiveness of Chinese Medicine Clinical
advantageous compared to rehabilitation
Treatment Combined with Rehabilitation
therapy alone.
Therapy on Stroke
Chinese medicine, acupuncture, massage and
94
Current Research in Medical Sciences
Table 2. Comparison of ADL scores between the two groups
Group n Before treatment After treatment t p
Observation group 42 61.05±6.94 82.29±7.33 13.637 0.000
Control group 42 62.20±7.44 71.03±8.35 5.117 0.000
t 0.733 6.568
p 0.466 0.000
Compared with the single use of rehabilitation relevant data show that in the study of the
training for stroke patients, the application of proportion of different modalities of
specific Chinese medicine on top of it can make intervention in Chinese medicine, acupuncture
the rehabilitation effect of stroke patients more therapy is the main means of treatment at about
significant, and studies have shown that the 42.31%, traditional Chinese medicine accounts
combination of specific rehabilitation methods for 11.12%, moxibustion accounts for 2.32%, the
with Chinese medicine can significantly proportion of integrated rehabilitation therapy
accelerate the healing process of patients with of Chinese medicine is 6.68% and the proportion
stroke. of other effective treatments in Chinese
medicine accounts for 37.57% and so on. The
The acupuncture method is also the majority
proportion of integrated rehabilitation treatment
choice for TCM practitioners during stroke
in Chinese medicine is relatively low.
rehabilitation, with Baihui and Shusanli being
the key acupuncture points for acupuncture. The 2.1.3 Effectiveness of Combined Chinese and
physiological functions of patients such as Western Medicine Clinical Treatment and
swallowing and articulation can be improved to Rehabilitation Therapy on Stroke
a certain extent by using ordinary acupuncture
Clinical observations made in the purely
methods, and rehabilitation training alone can
Western medicine treatment group and the
also help patients recover from swallowing
combined Chinese and Western medicine
disorders, but acupuncture combined with TCM
treatment group confirmed that the recovery
rehabilitation training is more advantageous
rate of the combined Chinese and Western
than the former in recovering from swallowing
medicine treatment is almost 1.859 times higher
dysfunction in stroke patients. Relevant clinical
than that of the purely Western medicine
studies have also confirmed this view.
treatment in terms of the recovery of stroke
Stroke patients need to undergo a patients. Comparing the effect of conventional
comprehensive physical examination before Western medicine and rehabilitation therapy as
receiving acupuncture treatment according to a controlled study with the combined Western
the condition and individual differences of the and Chinese medicine and rehabilitation
patient’s choice such as warm needles, therapy group, the clinical study shows that the
electroacupuncture, moxibustion and so on. combination of Western and Chinese medicine
Rehabilitation therapy can improve the recovery and rehabilitation therapy as a whole has a
level of stroke patients through physical therapy, better effect on the recovery of stroke patients
functional training and psychological than the former.
counselling. The combination of Chinese
In the treatment of patients with partial cerebral
medicine and rehabilitation therapy in stroke
dysfunction due to disruption of blood supply
has a good application prospect, and the
to the brain or rupture of blood vessels, the
practical application of Chinese medicine and
method of combining traditional Chinese and
rehabilitation therapy has the advantages of
Western medicine with rehabilitation therapy
Chinese medicine theory and modern
was significantly more effective in the recovery
rehabilitation medicine, which promotes the
effect and CNS score of patients with stroke than
further development of the combination of
the traditional Western medical therapy when
Chinese medicine and rehabilitation therapy in
compared with the CNS deficit capacity during
stroke, however, the recognition of the
the recovery period of the treatment. Under the
combination of Chinese medicine and
auxiliary treatment of rehabilitation exercise,
rehabilitation therapy is not enough. Statistical
some of the functional functions of the patient’s
95
Current Research in Medical Sciences
brain as well as the involved daily life ability only a small proportion of those who did not
and so on had a relatively stable recovery receive rehabilitation were able to achieve this
effectiveness on the original basic level. goal within the same period. Secondly, in a
randomised controlled trial of acute stroke
Chinese and Western medicine combined with
patients, it was found that the speed of limb
rehabilitation therapy is an effective
function recovery was relatively fast among
comprehensive medical model for stroke
patients who received rehabilitation therapy.
patients, and the theory of rehabilitation therapy
Observations of grip strength, balance, walking
intervenes in the relative perfection of Chinese
ability, and walking speed in acute-phase stroke
and Western medicine combined treatment of
patients over three months of receiving
stroke, and the practical application has been
rehabilitation therapy found that all of the above
gradually promoted, which makes full use of the
functions were significantly improved in
advanced techniques and therapies of
patients who were also intervening in early
rehabilitation therapy while giving full play to
rehabilitation therapy.
the unique advantages of the combination of
Chinese and Western medicine. It is worthwhile In the experimental analysis of the degree of
to widely promote the clinical application of this neurological deficits in acute stroke patients,
treatment method to effectively improve the under the same base case, the total effective rate
recovery of stroke patients. However, further of clinical recovery of interventional
research is needed to explore the optimal rehabilitation therapy is 1.32 times that of the
treatment plan and mechanism of combined control group, of which the probability of basic
Chinese and Western medicine rehabilitation recovery is 1.75 times that of the group that did
therapy for stroke patients, to provide better not receive rehabilitation therapy, and the
rehabilitation services for stroke patients. majority of the patients who received
rehabilitation therapy showed better results in
2.2 Effectiveness of Rehabilitation Therapy on Stroke
the recovery process, and very few patients had
Patients in Different Periods
no effect in the recovery process; as the
Through collecting and collating relevant
inefficiency of the control group without
clinical practice studies in recent years, we make
interventional rehabilitation therapy is
comparative analyses on the selection of
significantly higher than that of the
rehabilitation therapy intervention for stroke
experimental group that received rehabilitation
patients in different periods.
therapy at an early stage, the total effective rate
2.2.1 Effect of Rehabilitation Therapy on Acute of the latter group highlights a greater
Stroke Patients advantage. The inefficiency of the control group,
Acute stroke is a serious condition that requires which did not intervene in rehabilitation, was
timely intervention and treatment. Studies have significantly higher than that of the
found that early initiation of rehabilitation experimental group, which received
therapy can significantly improve the prognosis rehabilitation at an early stage, i.e., the latter’s
of stroke patients. A comparison of the efficacy total effective rate highlighted a greater
of acute stroke patients treated with advantage, which also indicates that the early
conventional medication and stroke patients acceptance of comprehensive rehabilitation
treated with conventional medication with therapy in acute stroke patients has a certain
simultaneous intervention of rehabilitation degree of improvement in the improvement of
therapy shows that timely rehabilitation of acute the neurological function of stroke patients. In
stroke patients can reduce the risk of disability addition, the implementation of standard
and improve the ability of stroke patients to take treatment measures and rehabilitation
care of themselves in the subsequent period of physiotherapy programmes for acute stroke
life. The results show that timely rehabilitation patients during the post-traumatic period can
for acute stroke patients can reduce the risk of significantly reduce the morbidity and mortality
disability and improve the ability of stroke rates of stroke patients, especially for the overall
patients to take care of themselves. Comparative long-term recovery of the patients, which also
studies have shown that a larger proportion of indicates that rehabilitation not only improves
acute stroke patients who received early the recovery of some of the abilities of the acute
rehabilitation regained the ability to walk stroke patients but also reduces the risk of some
independently within the same period, whereas disabilities.
96
Current Research in Medical Sciences
2.2.2 Effectiveness of Rehabilitation Therapy on combined with the special rehabilitation exercise
Recovering Stroke Patients therapy can significantly improve the efficiency
of walking, and effectively restore the stroke. It
The recovery period of stroke patients also
was concluded that the combination of
occupies a relatively important position in the
rehabilitation therapy and special rehabilitation
whole treatment process. In the clinical study of
exercise therapy could significantly improve the
stroke recovery patients, some patients were
walking efficiency and effectively restore the
treated with conventional therapy. The other
mobility of the patients in the post-stroke period.
side was intervened with rehabilitation therapy
Formal rehabilitation training for patients in the
under the condition of stable condition. The
post-stroke period has the effect of attenuating
results showed that receiving rehabilitation
the rate of functional deterioration to varying
therapy in the recovery period from stroke had
degrees. In the process of rehabilitation training
an outstanding improvement in the ability to
in the late stage of stroke, the condition is
reduce the degree of neurological damage. T
relatively stable in the late stage, and the use of
patients who the same application of
effective medical resources such as in the
rehabilitation therapy training is helpful for the
community and at home can be accompanied by
formation of brain cells around the foci in the
family members to carry out rehabilitation
brain of the patients, and the new neural
training, and the effect is more significant.
pathways are better able to restore the patient’s
neurological function. For the recovery of There are many deficiencies in the intervention
cognitive, speech and motor functions in of rehabilitation therapy in stroke, and early
patients recovering from stroke, corresponding rehabilitation therapy has a more prominent
clinical studies have shown that the efficacy of impact on the recovery outcome of stroke
systematic rehabilitation therapy has a positive patients. However, there still exists the
impact on these aspects. Rehabilitation therapy phenomenon that rehabilitation therapy is not
in the collaborative treatment of patients sufficiently intervened, which causes many
recovering from stroke is not an important stroke patients to miss the best time for recovery
means, there are many breakthroughs and and slows down their recovery process.
research based on the existing rehabilitation
3. Reasons for Limitation of Rehabilitation
extended care combined with spasmolytic
Intervention in Stroke
formula can effectively improve the function of
Rehabilitation therapy is becoming more and
the patient’s upper limbs, so that the efficacy of
more important for the recovery of stroke
rehabilitation is greatly improved, this type of
patients, aiming at restoring their functional
method of recovery of the body function of
deficits and improving their quality of life.
stroke patients is a more prominent
However, there are several limitations in the
improvement.
intervention of rehabilitation therapy in stroke
2.2.3 Effectiveness of Rehabilitation Therapy for
that lead to the inadequacy of the intervention of
Stroke Patients in the Post-Stroke Period
rehabilitation therapy in stroke, and there are
After the onset of stroke patients do not receive many aspects that need to be broken through.
timely and effective follow-up of appropriate
3.1 Rehabilitation Intervention in Stroke Is Limited
rehabilitation programmes, which may cause
by the Wishes of Stroke Patients and Family Support
some patients to enter the post-stroke period,
As most of the strokes are of sudden onset, the
these patients need a longer recovery process,
phenomenon of not actively participating in the
the rehabilitation therapy as an auxiliary
treatment during the stroke treatment process
treatment method is more effective. Existing
directly leads to poor results.
research divided the patients with stroke in the
sequelae stage into two groups, both groups of The wishes of stroke patients are particularly
patients received medication and rehabilitation important. On the one hand, stroke patients
training, one group added specific rehabilitation need to undergo a series of long-term training
therapies based on which to maintain the and exercises in the course of rehabilitation, and
consistency of the training time and frequency may be reluctant to continue the treatment due
of the two groups and assessed the mobility, to psychological fear or pain, at the same time,
range of motion, and speed of movement of the they may have psychological problems of loss of
lower limbs of the patients in the later stage to confidence, believing that the rehabilitation can’t
conclude that the rehabilitation therapy bring about significant improvement, thus
97
Current Research in Medical Sciences
limiting the effect of rehabilitation treatment. On equipment and technology still need to be
the other hand, the rehabilitation process may improved, which cannot fully simulate the brain
be arduous and time-consuming, and stroke activity, limiting the presentation of the
patients may lack the motivation to continue rehabilitation effect, and the evaluation indexes
during the recovery period, thus losing their of the level of science and technology of
willingness to be treated. Tedious rehabilitation rehabilitation intervention in stroke in the
training may not be able to achieve much effect, existing medical system are not clear, which
but two-way interaction, motivation and other need to be standardised to strengthen the
behaviours can, to a certain extent, help stroke provision of individualised rehabilitation
patients’ self-affirmation and help them therapy for each stroke patient.
overcome negative emotions and difficulties in
Monitoring during rehabilitation is an important
the process of rehabilitation, which is beneficial
means of assessing the effect of rehabilitation
to the recovery of the disease, but we must also
and adjusting the treatment plan. However, at
keep the training in phases to keep up with our
this stage, there is no clear consensus on the
strengths, and not to seek for quicker and
optimal start time and duration of rehabilitation
quicker training.
intervention in stroke. For example, although
Family support is likewise an indispensable early rehabilitation has a positive impact on
factor in the recovery process of rehabilitation improving the speed of recovery of limb motor
therapy. However, some families may not function in stroke patients, its correlation with
believe that rehabilitation can bring significant functional prognosis needs to be further
results, and many stroke patients and their investigated. At the same time, the optimal
family members lack awareness of the intensity or “dosage” of rehabilitation
importance of rehabilitation, have a negative intervention in stroke is still unclear, and the
attitude or lack of understanding of the monitoring and evaluation of the process of
intervention of rehabilitation in stroke, and thus rehabilitation intervention in stroke by medical
do not have much positive support for the institutions is not comprehensive and systematic
treatment process. Rehabilitation requires the enough, and the emergence of inaccurate data
cooperation of both the stroke patient and indexes makes it difficult to accurately assess
family members, including assistance in daily and adjust the effects of rehabilitation therapy.
life and supervision of exercises, etc., and the There are also unregulated organisations that
absence of either party may lead to difficulties in usually claim to have professional standards,
the recovery process. but in reality, there are unpredictable risks.
Some patients do not have enough trust in this
3.2 Rehabilitation Therapy Faces Limitations in the
type of organisation, making it difficult to
Development of Stroke in Terms of the Level of
distinguish which organisations are reliable and
Science and Technology and Process Monitoring
qualified, which makes patients feel confused
Domestic rehabilitation therapy technology has
and uneasy when choosing a rehabilitation
made a certain degree of progress, but there are
treatment for stroke.
still breakthroughs to be made on the original
3.3 Rehabilitation Intervention in Stroke Faces a Lack
basis. For example, the methods and means of
of Medical Resources
rehabilitation therapy are still relatively single
and lack personalisation. Rehabilitation China’s investment in the field of stroke
treatments for stroke include things like rehabilitation therapy is still relatively
rehabilitation training, neural stem cell therapy, insufficient, and medical resources are not
and endoscopic surgery, but the efficacy of these enough to meet the needs of stroke patients. The
treatments has yet to form a unified consensus treatment facilities required for rehabilitation
in clinical practice, causing problems for stroke therapy directly affect the rehabilitation effect of
patients in their choices. They also fail to meet stroke patients, however, in many areas, the
the rehabilitation needs of different patients at rehabilitation treatment facilities are relatively
different stages of their lives. Each stroke lagging, and the lack of facilities is one of the
patient’s condition is different, and thus a main manifestations of the insufficiency of
personalised plan needs to be developed medical resources, and at present the medical
according to the patient’s condition and resources are mainly concentrated in the
individual differences. However, in some relatively well-developed big cities, while the
medical institutions, the existing rehabilitation rural areas and some underdeveloped areas are
98
Current Research in Medical Sciences
lacking in a certain amount of medical is currently a general shortage of these
equipment and professionals, which makes the personnel, who help stroke patients improve
local stroke patients not able to get rehabilitation their physical function through rehabilitation
therapy in a timely and effective manner. This techniques and daily training. However, due to
unbalanced development has prevented early the current situation of a lack of rehabilitation
rehabilitation from being adequately therapists practising in the country, the demand
implemented, and many stroke patients have is high, the number of hospitals and other
missed the best time for recovery, slowing down rehabilitation treatment institutions has been
their rehabilitation process. increasing in the last two decades, and the
number of institutions in need of rehabilitation
Rehabilitation therapy requires comprehensive
therapists has also increased as much as the
intervention by a professional medical team,
number of demand for rehabilitation therapists
including rehabilitation physicians,
has increased, the supply exceeds the demand
rehabilitation therapists, rehabilitation nurses,
resulting in the difficulty in meeting the demand
etc. The lack of professionals restricts the
for rehabilitation treatment of stroke, and many
promotion and development of rehabilitation
stroke patients are unable to get the services and
therapy. Rehabilitation physicians, rehabilitation
guidance of specific rehabilitation therapists
therapists, and rehabilitation nurses are
promptly.
important components that form a triad and are
indispensable in rehabilitation therapy, but there
Number of hospitals Number of rehabilitation therapists up
Level of hospital
(number) to standard (number)
Level III hospitals 821 442
Level II hospitals 6765 1588
Rehabilitation centres 87 87
Total
2002
Number of hospitals Number of rehabilitation therapists up
Level of hospital
(number) to standard (number)
Level III hospitals 821 656-738
Level II hospitals 6765 5462-6089
Rehabilitation centres 87 87
Total
2005
Type of Institution Level Number (No.)
Level III hospitals 1284
Level II hospitals 6472
Rehabilitation centres 268
Social Health Service Centres 10100
Total
2010
99
Current Research in Medical Sciences
Type of Institution Level Number (No.)
Level III hospitals 2996
Level II hospitals 10404
Rehabilitation centres 739
Social Health Service Centres 35365
Total
2020
Rehabilitation medical equipment used by patients but also has an unintended policy
rehabilitation therapists also has a certain impact on the development of the relevant
impact on the recovery of stroke patients. departments in the healthcare organisations.
Insufficient investment in medical resources has
3.4 Rehabilitation Therapy Is Generally Limited in
affected the inability of many medical
Terms of Long-Term Outcomes in Stroke
institutions to supply adequate rehabilitation
Rehabilitation therapy aims to improve the
equipment, which has seriously constrained the
quality of life and functional recovery of stroke
development of rehabilitation therapy. Many
patients, and the continuity and effectiveness of
slower-developing hospitals also face the
rehabilitation therapy need to be fully reflected,
problem of insufficient beds, however, the
unsatisfactory long-term results require further
rehabilitation of stroke patients takes a long time,
research to explore how to optimise the
and the relative lack of beds in medical
treatment plan. In conclusion, rehabilitation
resources makes it impossible to carry out
therapy in the development of stroke is faced
rehabilitation treatment smoothly.
with the limitations of patients’ wishes and
The health insurance system for rehabilitation
family support, insufficient medical resources
also has some shortcomings and challenges.
and professionals, lack of early intervention,
After some reforms and adjustments were made
difficulties in personalisation, incomplete
to the health insurance system for stroke
monitoring, limitations in the level of science
rehabilitation treatment in recent years, more
and technology, and unsatisfactory long-term
stroke patients flowed to primary hospitals,
results.
which optimised the allocation of healthcare
To improve the rehabilitation effect of stroke
resources, and the increase in the length of
patients, we need to strengthen the investment
hospitalisation of stroke patients made it
in rehabilitation treatment, improve the
possible to meet the demand for rehabilitation
allocation of medical resources, the rational use
treatment. However, this has also led to an
of health insurance funds, increase the
increasing trend in hospitalisation costs and
proportion of early rehabilitation intervention in
out-of-pocket expenses, a lower reimbursement
stroke, strengthen the implementation of
rate within the domestic health insurance
personalised treatment for stroke patients,
coverage, and a heavier financial burden for
improve the monitoring and evaluation of the
stroke patients.
entire rehabilitation process, and explore more
On the other hand, there are some problems
personalised and targeted treatment methods.
with the application of the health insurance
Strengthen the publicity and education of
system to stroke inpatients in rehabilitation
rehabilitation intervention in stroke, and
departments. For example, for stroke patients
increase the awareness and participation of
who need rehabilitation treatment in the late
stroke patients and their families in this
stage of acute treatment, the payment method
treatment programme. To achieve a better
according to Disease Diagnosis-Related
long-term effect of rehabilitation intervention in
Grouping (DRG)/per diem implemented at this
stroke, it is also necessary to further carry out
stage is not appropriate, which leads to some
relevant research to understand the mechanism
patients being forced to be discharged early or
and method of rehabilitation intervention in
transferred to other hospitals for many times,
stroke, to provide better support and guidance
which not only affects the normal course of
for the rehabilitation of stroke patients.
treatment and the experience of the stroke
100
Current Research in Medical Sciences
4. The Value and Function of Rehabilitation rehabilitation can play an important role in the
Therapy in Stroke psychological aspect. Stroke patients often fall
into psychological difficulties because of
4.1 Rehabilitation Therapy Effectively Promotes the
physical dysfunction and reduced living ability.
Recovery of Various Functions of Stroke Patients
Rehabilitation therapy can not only help stroke
Stroke patients often suffer from a series of
patients restore physical function but also
neurological dysfunctions such as unclear
provide psychological support and counselling
speech, dysphagia, muscle weakness, sensory
to help stroke patients cope with these
abnormalities, motor incoordination and so on
challenges. At the macro level, in these respects
due to brain damage, and rehabilitation therapy
rehabilitation therapy intervenes in stroke as a
has an outstanding effect on the recovery of
systematic and comprehensive medical
these dysfunctions. For stroke patients with
treatment, highlighting its value as an adjunctive
unclear speech and swallowing difficulties,
treatment. Rehabilitation therapy provides
rehabilitation therapy can effectively improve
comprehensive support for the full recovery of
the speech ability of stroke patients through
stroke patients, helping them to recover
specialised articulation training, language
functionally and improve their quality of life,
comprehension and other speech training; after
giving them more hope for recovery, and thus
targeted swallowing training, the swallowing
achieving the best possible rehabilitation
ability of stroke patients is also significantly
outcome.
improved, and the risk of swallowing aspiration
4.3 Rehabilitation Therapy Is Specifically Designed
is reduced. Rehabilitation therapy helps stroke
to Optimise the Allocation of Social Medical
patients with limb motor dysfunction to
Resources for Stroke Patients
undergo a series of physical training to promote
motor recovery of damaged muscles. Balance Due to the limited nature of social medical
training and coordination training for stroke resources, stroke patients often face a lack of
patients can improve the plasticity of the resources. Rehabilitation therapy is a key link in
nervous system of stroke patients and promote the recovery of stroke patients, which plays an
the reconnection of damaged areas. These optimising role in the rational allocation of
training tools help stroke patients to actively social medical resources needed by stroke
face the difficulties in the rehabilitation process, patients, and promotes the recovery of patients’
and improve the motivation and persistence of physical functions and the reconstruction of
treatment so that they can regain the self-care their social roles. This important means of
ability of daily life and the subsequent quality of rehabilitation therapy improves the utilisation of
life of stroke patients can be improved. social medical resources to a certain extent, and
by rationally arranging the process and time of
4.2 Rehabilitation Is an Important Adjunct to Stroke
rehabilitation therapy, hospitals can make better
Recovery
use of beds and medical equipment to provide
Early intervention of rehabilitation therapy in
medical equipment for other patients, thus
stroke can minimise complications such as
promoting the high-quality development of
muscle atrophy, joint stiffness and disability.
rehabilitation medical services and meeting the
Early intervention in rehabilitation usually
diversified and differentiated needs of the
begins as soon as the stroke patient’s condition is
masses for rehabilitation medical services.
stabilised, and in some cases even while the
4.4 Rehabilitation Therapy Intervention in Stroke
stroke patient is still in the intensive care unit.
Promotes the Improvement of the Rehabilitation
Rehabilitation therapists develop an
Treatment System
individualised treatment plan that is tailored to
the specific needs of the stroke patient. Through The refinement of the technical level of
the use of various methods of physiotherapy, rehabilitation therapy promotes the
functional restoration and assistive devices, improvement of the rehabilitation therapy
comprehensive rehabilitation interventions are system, and the virtual reality technology
carried out for stroke patients. Rehabilitation provides different treatment effects from the
goal-setting, rehabilitation assessment, usual ones, such as some gradual intelligence:
rehabilitation training and rehabilitation dynamic orthosis, virtual reality technology,
education are all essential aspects of intelligent rehabilitation machine, etc., which
rehabilitation treatment. In addition, greatly improves the effect and efficiency of the
101
Current Research in Medical Sciences
rehabilitation therapy. Divani AA, Vazquez G, Barrett AM, et al. (2009).
Risk factors associated with injury
The construction of rehabilitation therapy
attributable to falling among elderly
disciplines and the increase in teaching power
population with history of stroke. Stroke,
have improved the professional level and
40(10), 3286-92.
professional quality of the whole industry. The
intervention of rehabilitation therapy in stroke Feng Bizhen, Zheng Qinfu, Chen Daoqing et al.
has promoted the research in the field of (2023). The impact and effect of health
rehabilitation therapy, including the research on insurance system reform on stroke
the effectiveness of rehabilitation therapy and rehabilitation. Health Soft Science, 37(08), 6-9.
the research on new treatment methods, etc.,
Fu Chunfeng. (2019). The effect of early
which provides stroke patients with more
comprehensive rehabilitation therapy on
comprehensive and effective rehabilitation
functional reconstruction of acute stroke
therapy and thus improves the rehabilitation
patients. Chinese Contemporary Medicine,
therapy system.
26(22), 65-68.
Reasonable and effective strengthening of
Fu Yan, Yao Xugao. (2014). Effect analysis of
cooperation and coordination between medical
progressive rehabilitation nursing in limb
institutions, close cooperation between multiple
function rehabilitation of stroke patients.
disciplines to form a comprehensive
Journal of Guiyang College of Traditional
rehabilitation treatment model, the
Chinese Medicine, 36(03), 96-98.
establishment of a professional network for
Gao Chunhua, Huang Jie, Wang Shengqiang et
stroke rehabilitation treatment, the formation of
al. (2014). Effect of early integrated
a rehabilitation service network with wider
rehabilitation on functional reconstruction
coverage from the rehabilitation departments of
in acute stroke patients. Neurological Injury
large general hospitals to community
and Functional Reconstruction, 9(05), 408-410.
rehabilitation centres, and the promotion of
information sharing between medical Gao Juntai, Yan Chunlu, Yu Xiaoying et al.
institutions. (2023). Clinical study on functional
rehabilitation of ischaemic stroke patients
Rehabilitation therapy has multiple advantages
with combined rehabilitation therapy of
in the clinical application of intervention in
Chinese and Western medicine. Journal of
stroke patients. At this stage, the degree of
Shaanxi University of Traditional Chinese
rehabilitation therapy intervention in stroke
Medicine, 46(03), 81-86.
needs to be improved, and we should fully
DOI:10.13424/j.cnki.jsctcm.2023.03.016.
recognise the effective level of recovery of
rehabilitation therapy intervention in stroke Huang Santao. (2016). The effect of
patients, continue to fight to break through the psychological care combined with motor
restricted conditions, and spare no effort to function rehabilitation therapy on
support and promote this important medical neurological function recovery of
service. hemiplegic patients with stroke.
Contemporary Nurses (Upper Ten Journal), (10),
References
136-137.
Chen Hongxia, Guo Youhua, Xie Renming, et al.
Huang XM, Zhang MX, Shi YH et al. (2015).
(2010). Effects of rehabilitation combined
Analysis of the current status of early
with qi benefit method on neurological
rehabilitation treatment after stroke. China
function, motor function and activities of
Health Standard Management, 6(20), 31-33.
daily living in patients with ischaemic
stroke with qi deficiency. New Chinese Huang Ying. (2020). Discussion on the clinical
Medicine, 42(10), 13-15. efficacy of early comprehensive
DOI:10.13457/j.cnki.jncm.2010.10.008. rehabilitation for acute stroke. Medical Food
Therapy and Health, 18(24), 227-228.
Ding Xuehui, Hu Xinyu. (2023). Clinical effect of
general acupuncture combined with Jin Pretty, Huang Qian. (2006). Clinical research
Chinese medicine rehabilitation training in on early comprehensive rehabilitation
the treatment of dysphagia after ischaemic treatment of acute stroke patients. Chinese
stroke. Chinese MedicineGuide, 21(18), 57-60. Journal of Modern Medicine, (22), 3444-3446.
DOI:10.15912/j.cnki.gocm.2023.18.028.
102
Current Research in Medical Sciences
LI Jingbin, CUI Xianghong, TONG Mingjie et al. formula on spastic upper limbs of patients
(2024). Progress of rehabilitation treatment recovering from stroke. Modern Medicine and
for hand dysfunction after stroke. Chinese Health Research Electronic Journal, 6(17),
Convalescent Medicine, 33(02), 54-58. 123-125.
DOI:10.13517/j.cnki.ccm.2024.02.011.
Qiu W-Ran, Xu H-M, Shen W et al. (2022). An
LIN Hao, ZHU Qingbin, NI Xiaojia et al. (2018). overview of the evaluation of the
A systematic evaluation of Chinese superiority of Chinese medicine in the
guidelines on stroke prevention and treatment of ischaemic stroke. Chinese
treatment by neurovascular surgery. Chinese Journal of Experimental Formulary, 28(12),
Journal of Cerebrovascular Disease, 15(04), 225-232. DOI:10.13422/j.cnki.syfjx.20221238.
169-176.
Rao Mingli. (2006). Abstract of the Chinese
Liu Qiuju, Yang WB, Sheng Xueping et al. (2010). Guidelines for the Prevention and
Clinical observation on functional Treatment of Cerebrovascular Disease (III).
rehabilitation of haemorrhagic stroke Journal of Stroke and Neurological Diseases,
patients treated with a combination of (01), 4-8.
Chinese and Western medicine. Journal of
Shang Min, Wang Yufeng, Yang Fengmei. (2014).
Gansu College of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Effects of systematic rehabilitation on
27(03), 32-35.
cognitive function, motor function and
Liu Songchan, Kou Qixing, Sun Gen et al. (2023). quality of life of patients recovering from
Clinical effect study of Chinese acupuncture stroke. Chinese Journal of Gerontology, 34(23),
and moxibustion rehabilitation for patients 6551-6553.
with limb dysfunction in stroke. Clinical
Sun Guanghua. (2016). Research on the effect of
Medical Engineering, 30(05), 629-630.
staged comprehensive rehabilitation
Liu Zhimei. (2018). Research on the clinical therapy on the neurological function of
efficacy of early intensive rehabilitation stroke patients. Electronic Journal of Clinical
therapy assisted by regulating and Medicine Literature, 3(49), 9677-9678.
dredging liver and collateral soup on DOI:10.16281/j.cnki.jocml.2016.49.001.
post-stroke depression. Chinese Community
The Collaborative Group of the Comprehensive
Physician, 34(21), 92+94.
Standardised Clinical (Internal Medicine)
Lu Didi. (2019). Analysis of the current situation Diagnosis and Treatment Research
and demand of practitioners in Programme for Stroke. (2005). Standardised
rehabilitation institutions. China treatment of acute stroke significantly
Rehabilitation Theory and Practice, 25(07), reduces in-hospital mortality. Chinese
859-864. Journal of Neurology, (01), 20-24.
Lu Dongying. (2017). Clinical application effect Time. (2016). Analysis of clinical efficacy of 36
of rehabilitation therapy in the cases of stroke disease treated with Chinese
rehabilitation of stroke patients. Journal of and Western medicine combined
Practical Clinical Medicine, 21(04), 175-177. rehabilitation methods. World Digest of
Latest Medical Information, 16(17), 151.
Lun Yixi, Wang Qiang, Mao Yong et al. (2023).
The effect of motor imagery therapy on WANG Biru, ZHOU Sweet, LIAO Weijing.
lower limb motor function of stroke patients (2021). Progress in the application of virtual
in the postictal stage. Chinese Journal of reality technology in the rehabilitation of
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 45(02), stroke patients. China Rehabilitation, 36(12),
131-133. 765-768.
Luo Hongqiu, Gao Yuanjie et al. (2015). Effects Xia Fan, Luo Yang. (2022). Effect of acupuncture
of early rehabilitation on neurological with rehabilitation therapy on functional
function and cerebral haemodynamics in recovery of early stroke patients. Bright
acute stroke patients. Chinese Journal of Chinese Medicine, 37(19), 3561-3563.
Practical Neurological Diseases, 18(20), 74-75.
Xie Xiaoleng, Zhang Cuixiang, Sun Ying. (2003).
Lv Qin, Wang Heqiang, Chen Bing et al. (2022). Effects of early rehabilitation on
The effect of rehabilitation extended care neurological deficits and ADL during stroke
combined with soothing and antispasmodic recovery. Zhongguo Nation Health Medicine,
103
Current Research in Medical Sciences
(11), 650-652.
Xue Dongxia, Li Jin. (2021). Effects of
synchronous health education of ultra-early
rehabilitation training on the prevention of
complications and functional recovery after
ischaemic stroke. Disease Surveillance and
Control, 15(06), 473-474+483.
DOI:10.19891/j.issn1673-9388.(2021)06-0473-
03.
Zhang H. (2022). Analysis of the improvement
effect of comprehensive rehabilitation
therapy on motor function of hemiplegic
patients with stroke. Electronic Journal of
Modern Medicine and Health Research, 6(10),
10-13.
ZHANG Xiuping, HAO Chunyan, ZHAO Huili.
(2006). Effects of rehabilitation on daily
living activities of elderly patients with
post-stroke sequelae. Chinese Journal of
Gerontology, (08), 1136.
Zhang Yuqing, Gao Jingjing, Cui Xiuzhen et al.
(2018). Improvement effect of graded
rehabilitation on swallowing function in
stroke patients. Biped and Health Care, 27(16),
43-44.
DOI:10.19589/j.cnki.issn1004-6569.2018.16.0
43.
Zhuo Dahong. (2004). Analysis of some issues
on the reform and development of
rehabilitation therapy technology education
in China. Chinese Journal of Rehabilitation
Medicine, (06), 6-10.
104