CEAS Space Journal (2024) 16:351–365
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12567-023-00500-4
ORIGINAL PAPER
Towards a seamless data cycle for space components: considerations
from the growing European future digital ecosystem Gaia‑X
A. Seidel1 · K. Wenzel1 · A. Hänel1 · U. Teicher1 · A. Weiß1 · U. Schäfer2 · S. Ihlenfeldt1,3 · H. Eisenmann2 · H. Ernst4
Received: 30 November 2022 / Revised: 24 April 2023 / Accepted: 25 April 2023 / Published online: 16 May 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
ESA’s Design 2 produces cross-cutting initiative includes digitalisation, process automation, interoperability, and harnessing
smart embedded sensors to achieve a seamless data cycle (SDC). The SDC in digital engineering covers requirements and
design, production, assembly, integration, and testing as well as in-flight operations including recycling. Nevertheless, central
data and legal challenges lie in the joint research addressed Europe-wide (geo-return) and the partner network constraints
covering agency, large system integrator (LSI), research and development (R&D), and high-tech SME interests. Either way, a
legal enabler for digitization of the European space business can be seen in ESA's strict compliance policy with regard to the
acceptance of their general terms and conditions. In fact, it is reasonable to assume that ESA declares data to be a common
deliverable in the future and that the contractors accept this too. However, there are technical challenges like portability,
interoperability, interconnectivity, and the need for a federated infrastructure, while all these aspects have to be solved across
company and national borders. The European Gaia-X project tackles the aforementioned challenges while targeting an open,
transparent, and secure digital ecosystem in which data are stored, processed, and used while retaining data sovereignty. This
paper deepens these framework conditions, addresses them from the perspective of real space applications, and presents
key opportunities and challenges at the implementation level. Moreover, it shows how the seamless data cycle contributes
to increase freedom of design, improve overall performance, and reduce cost and lead time from concept to manufacturing
while creating new high-performance space products.
Keywords Space4.0 · Digital transformation · Seamless data cycle · Gaia-X · Digital ecosystem · Data economy
1 Introduction is affected too and about to leap into a new era1 [3]. In fact,
new companies have entered the space market and gained
Our modern societies are currently undergoing a fundamen- success using methods and products of a digitized world
tal transformation from analog to digital processes effecting [4]. This, however, also affects high-tech products from
of all parts of our lives [1]. The Space Sector [2], obviously, robust hardware, their manufacture, and supply chains [5].
Consequently, the objective of the present paper is the dis-
course of this digital transformation while approaching the
*
A. Seidel collaborative production of high-performance space com-
andre.seidel@iwu.fraunhofer.de
ponents under the specific boundary conditions in European
1 Fraunhofer Institute for Machine Tools and Forming space sector. This includes typical space research funding,
Technology IWU, Nöthnitzer Straße 44, 01187 Dresden, the resulting transnational collaboration based on geography
Germany return (Chapter 2), as well as the awakening awareness for
2 Airbus Defence and Space GmbH, Claude-Dornier-Straße, the digital transformation in the space sector in terms of
88090 Immenstaad, Germany the digital agenda of the European Space Agency (ESA)
3 Institute of Mechatronic Engineering, Chair of Machine (Chapter 3). On the other hand, there is the European Gaia-X
Tools Development and Adaptive Controls, Technische initiative, which strives for domain-specific data spaces for
Universität Dresden, Helmholtzstr. 7a, 01069 Dresden, Europe which obviously has interesting synergy potentials
Germany
for space sector. Moreover, Gaia-X aims to interconnect
4 Airbus Defence and Space GmbH, Airbus-Allee 1,
28199 Bremen, Germany 1 ESA—What is space 4.0?
Vol.:(0112 33456789)
3 52 A. Seidel et al.
existing data infrastructure based on federated services that Table 1 ESA budget by domain for 2021
ensure identity and trust based on European laws, enable
M€ % Budget by domain
compliance and sovereign data exchange to create a data
economy based on European values. The latter in terms of 1223.8 18.9 Navigation
so-called Advanced Smart Services (ASS) that create added 62.4 1.0 Prodex
value based on data (Chapter 4). A future service addressed 557.0 8.6 Scientific programme
in this paper concerns the digital fusion of engineering and 274.8 4.2 Basic activities
manufacturing, which traditionally take place one after the 262.1 4.0 Associated with general budget
other (Chapter 5). The focus is on a data integration scenario 672.1 10.4 Human spaceflight, micro. and expl
(DIZ) based on the boundary conditions presented in the first 436.5 6.7 Telecom and integrated applications
part. The DIZ includes, on the one hand, typical stakeholders 219.4 3.4 Technology support
from the space sector, while the cooperative merging, on the 164.1 2.5 Space safety
other hand, creates added value through early property iden- 1.7 0.0 European cooperating states agreement
tification and higher component security. In concrete terms, 1439.9 22.2 Earth observation
this is achieved by replacing nominal (material) properties 1175.8 18.1 Space transportation
with actual properties, while the design, manufacture, and
testing of the hardware take place in iterations and each iter-
ation affects the next. The intervention, in turn, is based on 2025 that strives to boost commercialisation for a green and
a plan-do-check-act/adjust principle as basis for data-based digital Europe among the top actions for safe and secure
decision-making in, e.g., technical reviews. Either way, the data and communication infrastructure “in space, and from
current state of the prevailing “first-design-then-produce” space” [10].
method can, of course, be implemented unchanged (zero
2.2 Geo‑return
iteration), with the data being used for, e.g., verification
purposes.
The European-wide approach is not only a goal, and in turn,
it is a fundamental pillar in the financing of ESA called
2 E uropean space research
geographic return (geo-return) [2]. The geo-return policy
targets that all member states receive a significant share of
2.1 European space agency
their Agency contributions (Table 2) in the form of industrial
contracts [11].
The European Space Agency (ESA), formally established in An example application from the area of technology
1975,2 was founded to enable space collaborations reaching support in which geo-return is applied is set out in Table 3.
a critical size that clearly exceeds the possibilities of the The objective of this activity is to improve the advanced
individual members [6]. In 2021, ESA's budget was €6.49 manufacturing processes [12] in terms of cost, quality,
billion [7], which is about 27.9% of NASA's budget [8]. The technological advancement, manufacturing time, and/or
ESA budget is divided in domains (Table 1) [7]. reducing the time to market [13]. This shall be achieved
In 2021, ESA initiated 123 activities in the technology through the utilization of a digital twin (DT) concept
support domain, while 52 activities could be completed [7]. that allows process data, acquired during advanced
The work plan budget for 2021/2022, in turn, includes 209 manufacturing of space hardware, to be analyzed [14].
activities of which 94 put special emphasis on commercial ESA’s DT concept relates to the development of data
off-the-shelf (COTS) and Digital Engineering [7]. To ensure models for physical systems to accurately reproduce physical
the success of the commissioned development projects, ESA and performance characteristics of processes and products
has significantly strengthened its competencies in the areas [14]. Hänel et al. provide a clear example of what this means
of digital engineering, artificial intelligence, and cyber secu- in specific terms and how this can be implemented [15].
rity, while these areas being declared as emerging technol-
2.3 Cross‑cutting initiatives
ogy fields [7]. This is in line with ESA´s Automation and
Artificial Intelligence Roadmap [9] that shall foster Euro-
pean growth in applied AI in alignment with ESA Technol- In addition to the clear assignment to the respective
ogy Strategy to, e.g., increase efficiency and reduce cost for domains (Table 1), there have also been overarching fund-
space programs. The roadmap [9] is part of ESA’s Agenda ing initiatives at ESA established since 2012. These are
called “cross-cutting initiatives (CCI)”, while each initia-
tive is focused on a particular theme of interest for the
2 CSE/CS(73)19, rev. 7. future of the space industry [16]. The implementation
1 3
Towards a seamless data cycle for space components: considerations from the growing European… 353
Table 2 ESA budget returns in Table 4 ESA’s current cross-cutting initiatives
M€ % Country
2021 by funding source
Topic Source
1065.8 23.4 France
968.6 21.3 Germany Clean space [17]
589.9 13.0 Italy Advanced manufacturing [12]
418.8 9.2 United Kingdom Digital design to produce [18]
255.8 5.6 Belgium Cyber security [19]
223.6 4.9 Spain
197.6 4.3 –
172.6 3.8 Switzerland • adequately address the increasingly more frequent part-
87.9 1.9 The Netherlands nerships between the public and the private sectors,
83.2 1.8 Norway • to maximize programmatic synergies and use of assets—
80.0 1.8 Sweden resources and competences—available,
54.8 1.2 Austria • to foster and drive cross-fertilization, including best use
46.9 1.0 Luxembourg of lessons learned.
43.0 0.9 Romania
43.0 0.9 Czech Republic However, each CCI is focused on a particular theme of
39.0 0.9 Poland interest for the future of the space industry (Table 4) while
33.0 0.7 Denmark reflecting ESA´s Agenda 2025 set out by Aschbacher [10].
28.0 0.6 Portugal
27.5 0.6 Finland
24.9 0.5 Canada
3 ESA digital manufacturing
19.9 0.4 Greece
18.8 0.4 Ireland
3.1 What is needed
16.8 0.4 Hungary
3.1 0.1 Slovenia
ESA's drive toward digitization is already evident from the
2.7 0.1 Estonia
names of the initiatives (Table 4). Looking into, e.g., the
Design-to-Produce CCI, it becomes clear that future space
systems shall be fully integrated into modern economies,
Table 3 ESA example project from the field of digitization with
to serve new customers and integrate with diverse
applied geo-return
ground networks and smart devices [18]. This requires a
Title Development of a digital twin for transformation from a lengthy document centric traditional
advanced manufacturing processes
design, build and then test process toward a model centric
Subject ITT AO/1–10,611/21/NL/AR
analyze and build process more suitable to the new space
Item E/0904–611—GSTP element 1 “Develop”
environment [18]. Moreover, models and high-fidelity
Open date 09/04/2021 12:08 CEST
virtual environments shall be used to prototype, experiment
Closing date 21/05/2021 13:00 CEST
and test options and concepts, means integrating new
Budget Maximum 600 k€ (fixed firm price)
technologies with a faster pace.
Open To Tenderers From Belgium and Germany (Geo-Return)
Directorate Directorate of Tech, Eng. Quality
3.2 Seamless data cycle
Establishment ESTEC
Classified No
This should not be achieved independently; on the contrary,
ESA aims to apply novel techniques from terrestrial design
bridges different programs, technical disciplines, and tech- and manufacturing processes—including digitalisation,
nology levels, encouraging external partnerships where process automation, interoperability, and harnessing smart
appropriate [16]. This is to strengthen interdisciplinary embedded sensors—to cut the schedule and cost of space
approaches, exchange and coordination of R&D between missions [18]. This means to implement the digital transfor-
all programs, broaden interactions and links between mation and Industry 4.0 [20] which is changing the manufac-
upstream and downstream, and move toward a leaner, turing process in various ways. According to ESA does this
highly responsive, diverse and proactive Space 4.0 organi- include a single, seamless digital data cycle (SDC) (Fig. 1)
zation [16]. This shall be achieved through the following to link key disciplines from design to production, auto-
objectives [16]: mated inspections, augmented reality to guide integration
1 3
3 54 A. Seidel et al.
Fig. 2 Schematic representation of an advanced manufacturing data
space with reference to Table 3 under the assumption of controlled
external data access (e.g., digital troubleshooting) or data re-use (e.g.,
Fig. 1 ESA’s seamless data cycle [21]
machine learning) by a third party within the framework of the ESA
general terms and conditions (GTCs) adapted from [24]
and testing and embedded sensors giving an authoritative,
ongoing overview of product status [21]. of individual data spaces [24], countries (Table 3), and/or
The SDC is covered by adopting a digital model and companies [e.g., between large system integrators (LSI) [25]
digital engineering for end-to-end development across the and small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)] as illus-
entire supply chain. The digital transformation of the entire trated in Fig. 2.
supply chain shall enable continuous improvement of the Gaia-X, initiated by France and Germany, seeks to create
design and product based on analysis of data from embedded a proposal for the next generation of data infrastructure for
sensors, covering on-ground and aboard, plus streamlined Europe, while many ESA member states contributing to this
assembly, integration, and testing [18]. Moreover, this initiative (Table 53).
shall include the latest generation techniques for the shop The architecture of Gaia-X is based on the principle of
floor application of such techniques, including augmented decentralization [26] taken into account typical forms of
reality and automation and methods supporting execution of cooperation in space business (Fig. 2), although the illus-
assembly, integration, and testing, to prevent anomalies and tration represents explicitly only a section of the ecosys-
failures and reduce inefficiencies [18]. tem of relevant stakeholders. This shall be achieved via a
multitude of individual platforms that all follow a common
standard—the Gaia-X standard [24]. The Gaia-X stand-
4 The Gaia‑X initiative
ard supports the goals of interoperability of services, data
portability, and data sovereignty [27] as articulated in the
4.1 Purpose of Gaia‑X
European data strategy [17], and addresses a requirement
gap in the existing infrastructure models [24]. All in all, the
The framework conditions set out in the previous chap- present constellation combines a common political basis of
ters require a “common data space” as a foundation for the the central actors (c.f. Table 2 and Table 5), support from
implementation of a future “space data economy” which is the European Union [22], the current digitization efforts of
in line with the European strategy for data [22]. According the ESA (Chapter 3), and the opportunity on the basis of
to Franklin et al. [23], they require data spaces in a data inte- the ESA GTCs (which must be accepted to submit a fully
gration concept that follows linked data design principles. compliant offer) that could declare data to an deliverable,
Otto [24] notes in this context that data spaces do not require which, in turn, creates an excellent starting point for data-
physical data integration, and on the contrary, they leave the driven use cases and digital business models of the future.
data at the source and only make it accessible when needed.
Gaia-X aims to achieve the desired data interoperability
and collaboration of actors (Fig. 1) across the boundaries 3 https:// www. gxfs. eu/ de/ Gaia-X- hubs/
1 3
Towards a seamless data cycle for space components: considerations from the growing European… 355
Table 5 List of Gaia-X Hubs forced data pooling. Hybrid cloud scenarios and distributed
Country ESA
as contact points for interested member implementation (vertical and horizontal) enable this across
parties with ESA member states
state data providers (interoperable) Fig. 3. A key aspect of Gaia-X
high-lighted in bold
is the use of sovereign identity procedures (Self Sovereign
Austria
ID & Trust) [28] that shall clearly identify the data provid-
Belgium
ers (Fig. 3, infrastructure ecosystem in red at the bottom)
California
and data users (Fig. 3, data ecosystem in blue at the top) as
Finland
trusted participants [29].
France
The basis for assessing the compliance [30] of a partic-
Germany
ipant is the Minimum Viable Set (MVS) of Policy Rules
Greece
developed by the Gaia-X Policy Rules Committee and
Hungary
approved by the Board of Directors of the Gaia-X AISBL
Italy
[31]. The approval process is currently being developed, but
Japan
is going to be based on recognized standards and established
Luxembourg conformity assessment tools [32]. Either way, upon success-
The Netherlands ful completion of the validation process, verifiable creden-
Poland tials (vCs) representing the security levels of the service
Portugal offering are issued and registered in the Gaia-X Federated
Romania Catalogue (Fig. 3) [31]. These vCs can be used to auto-
Slovakia matically indicate the level of compliance in, e.g., different
Slovenia federations [32]. Another key element of federated services
South Korea concerns the sovereign exchange of data (Fig. 3). In fact,
Spain a controllable, sovereign, and traceable exchange of data
Texas across boundaries (Fig. 2) is essential for the establishment
Washington DC and success of a digital ecosystem. In practice, this means
to be able to send data from an existing device (e.g., cyber-
physical manufacturing system via an EDGE device [33])
or database (sector specific cloud; c.f. Fig. 2) to a trusted
recipient in a certified data space (data ecosystem). This,
however, includes that the data provider, which is a share-
holder of the data space [34], retains control over data and
conditions of its use [35]. The IDS trusted connector [36]
(c.f. IDS reference architecture model 4.0 [37, 38]) offers the
possibility for technical implementation enabling that data
are stored in virtual containers that are only used according
to the terms agreed by the parties involved. Moreover, there
are the federated services (Fig. 3), a catalog [39] system for
digital services addressing further assistance for sovereign
data exchange [40] and compliance [30] considerations.
However, the reference implementations for the federal ser-
Fig. 3 Gaia-X architecture and federated services [27] vices (Fig. 3) can be found and downloaded in the associated
Gitlab (Fig. 4).4
These services include transparent and verifiable descrip-
The latter shall be discussed further based on an architec-
tions, e.g., in relation to data protection, data security, and
tural consideration of Gaia-X and a central component of
compliance with technical standards and legal require-
ESA´s Advanced Telescope for High-ENergy Astrophysics
ments, while being checked for compliance (e.g., GDPR,
(ATHENA).
EU requirements, Cyber Security Act, and geolocation) and
certified and accredited in terms of trustworthiness [37]. In
4.2 Layered architecture of GAIA‑X
addition, the Gaia-X Association has recently published
a compliance and labeling framework. In fact, three basic
Essentially, the decentralized approach of Gaia-X is open
to other market participants [e.g., from other digital engi-
neering projects (c.f. chapter 2.1)] and their systems without
4 https:// gitlab. com/ gaia-x/ data- infra struc ture- feder ation- servi ces
1 3
3 56 A. Seidel et al.
for data protection, transparency, security, portability, flex-
ibility, and European control [41]. This framework ensures
a minimum level of compliance for any service, helping
to achieve the desired level of trust between entities and
services in the marketplace [42]. In addition, governments,
trade associations, industry associations, and agencies alike
will be allowed to ultimately create their labels and establish
specific rulebooks for each specific domain needs [41].
The International Data Spaces Association (IDSA) has
defined a reference architecture and a global standard for
creating and operating virtual data spaces [43] (Fig. 3). The
IDS Architecture is based on commonly recognized data
governance models [44] facilitating secure exchange and
easy linkage of data within business ecosystems. The latter
overcomes the, e.g., trilateral nature of cooperation toward
a multi-stakeholder collaboration (Figs. 1, 2). This means,
e.g., linking and use of data from production environments
(Fig. 1) by value-added services to achieve a breakthrough
for the broad implementation. These “Advanced Smart
Services (ASS)”, being provided cloud based, are the heart
of the arising future data economy (Fig. 3, data ecosystem
in blue at the top) while addressing themes like artificial
intelligence (AI), data analytics and automation (Table 4).
This means, at this point, if implemented correctly, there
will be future domain-specific data ecosystems (in analogy
to, e.g., the app stores of mobile phone manufacturers) in
which trustworthy actors offer data services (apps) which
can be used, e.g., by data providers (Fig. 3). Such a scenario
is further considered in a real use case.
5 Space domain implementation
5.1 Introduction
Fig. 4 Gitlab Gaia-X Federation Services
The COOPERANTS6 (COllabOrative Processes and sER-
compliance levels have been defined (Table 6)5 which can vices for AeroNauTics and Space) lighthouse project,
be obtained by services (Figs. 3, 4, data ecosystem in blue funded by the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and
at the top) based on different standards and expectations Climate Action (BMWK), will accelerate the digitization of
Table 6 Gaia-X compliance and labelling framework [41]
CL Description
Level 1 Basic level of compliance according to the rules defined by the Association and the European values. This level equally refers to the
European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA) standard in its current definition and future evolution
Level 2 Intermediate level of compliance, extending and enhancing Level 1 above, with a mandatory option to be in Europe. This level equally
refers to the ENISA standard in its ‘substantial compliance’ definition and future evolution
Level 3 High level of compliance, extending and enhancing level 2 above, while adding the principle of immunity to non-European access, but
with a mandate for a European location and operationalisation. This level refers to the ENISA ‘high compliance’ definition
5 https:// www. enisa. europa. eu/ 6 https:// coope rants. de/
1 3
Towards a seamless data cycle for space components: considerations from the growing European… 357
Collaboration Environment, [47]
Software Development Environment [48]
Marketplace [49]
Policy Enforcement [50]
Cloud Container Platform [51] of engineering and manufacture is examined in detail. This
Micro-Services Framework [52]
is to enable improved verification and simulation (c.f. Fig. 5,
API Management [53]
Smart Service Layer).
Integration Middleware [54]
Data Lake [55]
5.2 Athena space flight mission
Data Streaming [56]
Multi Tenancy [57]
5.2.1 Mission context and optical bench
The Advanced Telescope for High-Energy Astrophysics
(ATHENA), illustrated in Fig. 6, will be an X-ray telescope
designed to address the cosmic vision science theme of
the hot and energetic universe [59]. In 2014, Athena was
processes in the aeronautics and space industry. The goal of selected as the second large (L-class) mission [60] in ESA’s
the German consortium is to develop more efficient, decen- Cosmic Vision program [61]. One of the main components
tralized forms for future working methods and processes of the telescope is a metallic optical bench [46, 62] which
across the entire lifecycle of space or air vehicles. This will is part of the mirror assembly module (MAM), as shown in
serve to increase the competitiveness of the aeronautics and Fig. 6. The advanced manufacture (c.f. chapter 1) of ATHE-
space industry within Germany and the European Union. NA’s metallic OB, in turn, is further approached from the
The project is embedded in the initiative of the German perspective of ESA’s seamless data cycle (Fig. 1) using the
Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Action layered architecture of Gaia-X (Figs. 3, 5).
(BMWK) to develop innovative and practical applications
as well as data spaces in the Gaia-X digital ecosystem and 5.2.2 Athenas OB as neutral business object
addresses the application domains Industry 4.0 with par-
ticular emphasis on the needs of SME to enable data-driven In the following, the optical bench (OB) of the ATHENA
business models. The architectural approach of COOPER- Telescope is considered as a piece of hardware that is created
ANTS (Fig. 5) concretizes the abstract Gaia-X representa- with the participation of several stakeholders (c.f. Fig. 2).
tion (Fig. 3) while approaching the vertical and/or horizon- Moreover, the development and manufacturing process of
tal data exchange based on specific use cases such as the the OB is representatively abstracted and generally described
ATHENA Space Flight Mission [45, 46]. In the case of the to show the broad applicability of the targeted future data
latter, collaborative engineering with a focus on the linkage service (reference). Consequently, the ATHENA OB is
1 3
secapS
ataD*
Fig. 6 Schematic illustration of the ATHENA telescope and the
metallic optical bench part of the mirror assembly model (MAM)
User/Role Management & SSO [58]
Fig. 5 Cooperants layered architectural approach with illustration of
the ATHENA Space Pilot adapted from https:// dascl ab. eu/ de/
3 58 A. Seidel et al.
the cyber-physical production system (CPPS) [61] which is
used to manipulate the raw material toward the “as designed
geometry” while providing process data as “Production
Parameter Log Data” during the manipulation with
manufacturing processes. In addition, the actual geometry is
determined via 3D scan “as measured” and, in combination
with “production parameter log data”, a target/actual
comparison is performed to create an "as manufactured"
geometry, with the deviations determined by the target/
actual comparison being quantified and taken further for a
Fig. 7 Customer LSI business object flow root cause analysis. The intermediate work piece in the “as
manufactured” geometry is also linked to non-destructive
testing to determine residual stresses using neutron
further regarded as a neutral business object (Fig. 7). The radiation. It should be noted that this cycle also includes
latter, however, is initially a bilateral relationship between the NDT of the raw material to cover the determination of
the agency (ESA) and the LSI (here Airbus DS). The techni- the influence of machining on the residual stress state in
cal basis of this relationship is set out on the customer side ref to. However, there is the focus on the feedback loop,
by, e.g., the Statement of Work (SoW) defining the require- which updates the strength results “as designed” through
ments based on related system engineering. The LSI, on the the “as manufactured” to verdict to continue manipulation
other hand, uses this input to define the system requirements or perform thermo-mechanical tailoring in near-net-shape
by creating a system requirement specification (SRS). The condition. The feedback loop shall be considered in the
SRS is a refinement of the customer requirements, forming following chapter (Chapter 6).
the basis for the definition of the initial system architecture
5.3 Advanced manufacturing of Athena’s OB
after iteration and/or release.
The system architecture is the basis for the system design
definition, which depends on the equipment requirement 5.3.1 Digital workflow
specification, which, in turn, is derived from the system
requirement specification. The detail design definition is The “as designed” is a result of the LSI business object
done based on system design definition while depending on flow (Fig. 8). The CAD service uses Catia as a 3D con-
the Interface Control Documents (ICD) from the supplier struction software while providing an “as designed” Step
equipment including electrical, mechanical, and functional file as an exchange format. The “as designed” Step file
ICD. Expert analysis is performed in parallel based on is handed over to the CAM Service using TEBIS as path
the system requirement specification, by bidirectional planning software to generate the NC Code in CLDATA
iteration with the system architecture and by examination format. The NC code describes the manipulation of the
of the system design according to its definition. The result, hardware with the CPPS which is operated by SINU-
however, is an “as designed” object, which is further iterated MERIK 840D sl machine control. The process data, in
covering the “design for manufacturing”. turn, are generated and processed at the machine control
Based on the “as-designed geometry”, a structural level being classified as sampled high-frequency data.
analysis is enabled by updated stress results, which can be Examples are the change of axis positions and drive cur-
compared with the results of the strength analysis. Either rents, acquired or measured with sampling rates less than
way, all calculations are based on the geometrical design 2 ms and provided as JSON filetype. The procedure from
and nominal mechanical properties of the selected material. the machine to the JSON file is described in detail in [33,
The standard Q-ST-70-36C [60], in turn, requires, e.g., the 63]. The TwinProCut service uses the TwinProCut soft-
consideration of the directional variation of an alloy as well ware to, e.g., calculate the “as manufactured” geometry
as the residual stress distribution and the grain orientation. based on process data using validated models. In addition,
In that, it is [60] stated further that machining does not the “as manufactured” geometry is additionally measured
only alter the stress distribution, but it can also result in the via 3D Scan providing a digital geometrical representa-
exposure of a short transverse region on the surface of the tion "as measured" STL file too. TwinProCut is an appli-
finished part which is subjected to tension in service. Hence, cation-oriented implementation of model-based digital
the need is derived to integrate the determination of the twin, which, e.g., describes the geometric condition of
actual geometry and the material properties into the business the hardware while allowing the calculation and visuali-
object workflow (Fig. 9) while expanding the correlation of zation of the deviations between “as manufactured” and
strength analysis significantly. A central enabler for that is “as measured” geometry, e.g., induced by residual stresses.
1 3
Towards a seamless data cycle for space components: considerations from the growing European… 359
Fig. 8 Large system integrator
business object flow (BOF)
Moreover, in the present case of subtractive processing, to evaluate the strength results. A central advantage of the
TwinProCut further enables the characterization of the presented data workflow is that the outlined information
removed material in parallel to the manipulation. In fact, can be obtained by gradually manipulating the raw mate-
if looking at the potential directional variation of an alloy rial toward the final geometry. Hence, thermo-mechanical
in ref. Q-ST-70-36C [64], the spatially discrete mapping tailoring can be performed while having an equidistant
of, e.g., the cutting force [15], is applied as a destructive geometric offset to the target contour, which compensates
material testing method providing volumetric informa- for distortion and surface layer effects. The, e.g., heat
tion while machining. Either way, the information model treatment is described as a time–temperature curve and
of the software is set out in [65], while the model-based integrated into the digital representation as a CSV file
analytics-ready approach is described in detail in [15]. The where it is stored as the reason for the change between two
digital workflow includes the location-discrete determi- material and geometrical states. The geometrical evalua-
nation of residual stresses based on the non-destructive tion, again, is recorded as “as measured” and transferred
measurement of strain using neutron radiation [66]. Via a to the CAM service as geometry deviation while geometri-
CAQ tool service, the non-destructively measured values, cally enveloping the “as designed” geometry.
associated location coordinates, and derived information The digital flowchart is summarized in Table 6, where
are provided in tabular form as CSV file while altogether for each object, the software group, software, file type, and
being incorporated in the digital representation of the work outputs are listed.
piece using TwinProCut. The combination of mechanical
characterization results, description of the achieved geo-
metric precision, or the local quantification of the devia- 5.3.2 Deployment architecture
tions, respectively, as well as the result of the residual
stress determination serving as input for the execution of From an information technology perspective, the targeted
the “strength analysis result service”. This is done using scenario presents a challenge for data management. The
the “as manufactured”/”as measured” geometry for the data are highly heterogeneous with regard to its prove-
correlation of stress analysis results, while the results of nance, format, and scale. A deployment architecture for
the residual stress determination represent an, e.g., addi- integration must address all dimensions. First, diverse
tional load case. Here, Nastran is used as FEM software for provenance introduces requirements concerned with
both the correlation of the stress analysis results as well as
1 3
3 60 A. Seidel et al.
Table 7 Tabular summary of the digital flow chart with software group, software, file type, and outputs of each object
Object Software group Software File type Output
Geometry “as designed” CAD CATIA stp/stl Target envelope
Manipulate H/W with CPPS CAM TEBIS cldata NC-Code
Production parameter log data CNC Control SINUMERIK 840D sl JSON Process parameter
Geometry “as manufactured” Digital twin TwinProCut stp/stl Actual envelope
Work piece Digital twin TwinProCut stp/stl Actual envelope
Perform 3D scan CAM TEBIS cldata NC-Code
Product 3D scan data Digital twin TwinProCut stp/stl Actual envelope
Compare with production log with Digital twin TwinProCut stp/stl Actual envelope
Non destructive testing office MS Excel .csv location-discrete properties
Residual stresses “as manufactured geometry” Digital twin TwinProCut stp/stl Actual envelope
Correlation of stress analysis results FEM Nastran tbd Update stress results
Evaluate strength results FEM Nastran tbd Update strength results
Thermo-mechanical tailoring office MS Excel .csv Time–temperature diagram
Work piece Digital twin TwinProCut stp/stl Actual envelope
Perform 3D scan CAM TEBIS cldata NC-Code
Product 3D scan data Digital twin TwinProCut stp/stl Actual envelope
Compare with production log with Digital twin TwinProCut stp/stl Actual envelope
Non destructive testing office MS Excel .csv location-discrete properties
Residual stresses “as manufactured geometry” Digital twin TwinProCut stp/stl Actual envelope + location-
discrete properties
Correlation of stress analysis results FEM Nastran tbd Update stress results
Evaluate strength results FEM Nastran tbd Update strength results
protection of intellectual property and data sovereignty. Given the presence of centrally deployed Gaia-X Federa-
The multi-layered character of aeronautical supply chains tion Services (introduced in chapter 4.2), participants can
requires partners to integrate their enterprise data sources also exchange data safely with previously unknown parties.
into a network. To manage the access to a given data ser- Catalogs play a critical role in the discovery of and inter-
vice, interested parties are supported by tools such as the action with a third party’s data services. This deployment
Eclipse Dataspace Connector (EDC),7 an open-source architecture is suitable to address the challenge of incoher-
implementation of the IDS specification. A standard ent provenance of data in a distributed network. Second,
vocabulary for access rights, such as the Open Digital the challenge of heterogeneous data formats in data spaces
Rights Language [67], ensures interoperable exchange of can be met by enhancing data with semantic context [68].
data policies and can be parsed by connectors to restrict The described use case (Fig. 10) integrates data from edge-
the access for unauthorized requests. Using these building devices, digital solutions along the CAD-CAM-CAQ-chain,
blocks, an equipment supplier can participate in sover- measurement data form the manufacturing process, and cal-
eign data exchange with a customer (Fig. 10) by iterating culations data (Table 7) in different software systems and
requests or passing operational data directly from manu- file types. Annotating the documents and the data they con-
facturing to the smart service layer to perform specific tain with an appropriate set of meta-data elements allows
analysis of the manufacturing process (Fig. 5). However, systems consuming data from the network to parse and act
there are no restrictions on a company’s internal architec- upon it without the need for human intervention. Given
ture, since connectors can be used as backend adapters intersecting domains in a complex interaction scenario like
for enterprise systems to securely communicate outside this, semantic description must place focus on flexibility as
the intranet. Using them as central gateways to a network well as interoperability. Requiring all industry- and lifecy-
(Fig. 11) yields the same access to a data space and pro- cle-specific ontologies to reference a top-level ontology as
vides a useful migration path for newcomers. a common framework is a proven way to reliably integrate
ontologies [69] while still remaining open to integrate new
domains and partners. Strict application of semantic stand-
7 https:// github. com/ eclip se- datas pacec onnec tor/ DataS paceC onnec ards is suitable to address incoherent data formats. The third
tor challenge of the use case (Fig. 10) is the heterogeneous scale
1 3
Towards a seamless data cycle for space components: considerations from the growing European… 361
Fig. 9 BOF along the I/F LSI
for ATHENA digital model
of data and the necessary computing resources to handle
them. All objects/information systems described in Table 7
(TwinProCut, CAD/CAM,…) require different processing
systems. While some data flows may only occur sporadi-
cally, others stream large datasets continuously. The deploy-
ment architecture must consider this and seamlessly inte-
grate resources on the edge or in a local data platform and
with cloud services—of course while preserving sovereignty
guaranteed by dataspace connectors. The EDC has taken this
requirement into account by separating the contract negotia-
tion mechanisms from those facilitating the data exchange
once an agreement is reached [70]. The use-case architecture
reflects all three challenges while implementing a hybrid
(Fig. 11), with a dataspace that adheres to the principles
of Gaia-X while remaining true to the principles of mod-
ern IT enterprise architectures. Either way, the design and
realization of space programs is joint effort between various
organizations on different level (c.f. Figure 7, 9). Hence, the
resulting data are widely fragmented, technically but also
Fig. 10 Digital flowchart derived from the business object contractually. Consequently, providing a legally secure and
1 3
3 62 A. Seidel et al.
Fig. 11 Illustration of the
ATHENA space flight mission
Gaia-X deployment architecture
reliable contractual framework is a key enabling element (Fig. 9) including the realization of the desired digital model
for data ecosystems. The cooperants project underlying here (c.f. Figs. 1, 8). Moreover, the BOF (Fig. 9) was described
focuses on the technical aspects the utilization of the mecha- via a digital work flow (Fig. 10) whose objects (Table 7)
nisms of new collaboration services to build additional and contribute to the digital model (cf. Figs. 1, 10; Table 7).
new services on top. However, in parallel to this technical Additionally, a deployment architecture (c.f. Figs. 5, 11)
work, the discussion of the needed evolution of the contrac- based on the Gaia-X principles (Chapter 4) was presented.
tual framework is currently in progress. In fact, the legal The result, however, is data made available by trusted data
aspects (from the governance perspective c.f. Fig. 5) of the
advanced smart manufacturing service (Chapter 6) are con-
Project Management
sidered further and in isolation based on this publication.
Plan Do Check Act / Adjust Plan
En ( g m in e e c e h r . i ng Geometry & Analysis RP Serst o auj tle utsc s t& De (D ci a s t i a o - n b M as a e k d in ) g
Design)
6 A dvanced smart manufacturing service B Te u c d h g n e ic ts al
Deliverables/
Data Analytics Quality
Schedule
The SDC (Fig. 1) presented by ESA was exemplified as BOF 3D scan from the requirement and design phase until production Ma (P nu ro fa d c u t c u e ri ) ng Ma A n d u v f a a n c c tu e r d in g LMoagc dhaintea Res V s e ou rd rc i e
s
c s
p
t
r
f
i
o
n
r
t
next
using the Optical Bench of the ATHENA Telescope (Chap-
ter 5). The latter started from the bilateral concept between
the Agency and LSI (Fig. 7), about the detailing of the design
process (Fig. 8) to the detailed presentation of the production
1 3
00
F (“ E a M sa d /ne aS sltyi r gsu nicse tu d” r ) e Ana (“ l a y F s s E i m M s a a & n/ n S au G tlyr f e a usic o cst t m u u r r e e e t d r ” y ) CAnoarrleylsaisti oRne osfu lts
(S“tarse dsse asinganleysd”is) „aDsi gditeasl iTgwneind ” (“asS tmreasnsu afnaacltyusries d”) „as Dmigaintaulf aTcwtiunr ed” „aDsig diteasl iTgwneind ” Requirements
SFtEreMss ( (““aass d deessigignneedd””))
Process Data „as Dmig S a Ft i Er nt eM au ss lf ( (“ aT “aa c s w s m t m uin aa r n n e uuf d faac ” cttuurreedd””)) Cost
Fig. 12 Illustration of the Gaia-X deployment architecture-based
ASMS offering a plan-do-check-act/adjust procedure as used for the
manufacture of the ATHENA OB
Towards a seamless data cycle for space components: considerations from the growing European… 363
providers (Table 6; Fig. 11) in the domain-specific data • the future importance of digital production based on
space (Figs. 2, 5). The result, in turn, is an advanced smart representative partner constellations in the space sector
manufacturing service (ASMS) that links engineering and while linking ESA´s seamless data cycle approach to the
production via a data analytics layer (Fig. 12). The data ana- Gaia-X principles and showing the overlap,
lytics layer, based on the digital flowchart (Fig. 10), enables • the transfer of the generic layered architecture approach
plan-do-check-act/adjust cycles used for verification (digi- of Gaia-X into a representative space pilot application
tal twin as designed corresponds to as manufactured) offers transferring an on-premises scenario in a cloud-based
the possibility to react to “as manufactured” analysis results application with online services,
by making an “as designed” adjustment. An example of an • the representation of the business object flow between the
act/adjust scenario is the selection of a mechanical property stakeholders using a main component of the ATHENA
adjustment by a tailor-made heat treatment versus a design mission deriving the digital workflow in which the
adjustment (wall thickness increase), considering the cost TwinProCut Service will be implemented as a hybrid
and schedule implications (c.f. Fig. 12). It is essential that architecture-based advanced smart service in the Gaia-X
these decisions are made possible, while the component is ecosystem,
being manufactured (in parallel), which differs significantly • the selection of a hybrid scenario as deployment
from serial practice [33]. Moreover, the ASMS is not lim- architecture, while the data exchange is implemented via
ited to the usage in the space sector and can be used in the the Eclipse Dataspace Connector,
other domains based on the Gaia-X principles. In addition, • an application scenario, in which the digital production
the ASMS can be linked to other digital services that ena- twin is used for verification, with digital requirements
ble component-specific or cross-component analyses (c.f. being used as a basis for comparison,
Fig. 2). ASMS is contributing an essential in the overall • the digital production twin as a precise description of
effort of E2E digitalization. Quite advanced is at the moment the as-built component that is used further for assembly,
is the digitalization for service (an example for this is the integration and testing,
Skywise8 for Airbus commercial Aircraft). Efforts for digital • a Gaia-X deployment architecture-based Advanced
engineering are ongoing at full swing in the different organi- Smart Manufacturing Service offering a plan-do-check-
zation. ASMS is improving the connection with engineering act/adjust procedure for the manufacture of hardware
and service with manufacturing information, for sure with a developed based on the needs of the space sector that
focus on manufacturing, but also improving product quality can easily be transferred to other domains.
(with the loop into engineering), but also provide more data
for service.
Acknowledgements The work in this paper was partly funded by
the European Space Agency within the research project: “Telescope
mirror structure and optics integration demonstrator” (Contract No.:
7 Conclusions
4000132605/20/NL/BW Telescope mirror structure and optics inte-
gration demonstrator). In addition, the work in this paper was partly
funded by the German Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and
There is a broad consensus that developments in the space
Climate Action (BMWK) within the lighthouse project: “COllabOra-
sector must be implemented more quickly and cheaply in tive Processes and sERvices for AeroNauTics and Space (COOPER-
the future. On the other hand, space applications are in most ANTS)” referring to the funding codes “68GX21003M (Fraunhofer
cases high technology whose development is accompanied IWU)” and “68GX21003G Airbus Defence & Space”. Moreover, the
work in this paper was partly funded by the German Federal Ministry
by high safety requirements. Consequently, the quality of
of Economic Affairs and Climate Action (BMWK) within the light-
the development works is secured by standardized proce- house project: “Catena-X” referring to the funding code “13IK004*
dures, tests, and reviews, which must also be guaranteed (Fraunhofer IWU)”.
with increasing pressure in terms of cost and time. As a
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt
result, ways must be found to make the existing processes
DEAL.
more efficient instead of, e.g., costly qualifying new ones.
Regarding the manufacture of space hardware, this can be Data availability The data that support the findings of this study are
achieved by parallelizing testing and production, especially available from the corresponding author, andre.seidel@iwu.fraunhofer.
de, upon reasonable request.
if the production system describes the manufacture and
testing automatically and in a machine-readable manner. Declarations
This paper describes a possible approach how this can be
achieved. It shows: Conflict of interest The authors declare no conflict of interest.
8 Skywise | Enhance | Services | Airbus Aircraft.
1 3
3 64 A. Seidel et al.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 16. Directorate of Tech, Eng. quality, about cross-cutting initiatives:
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, enabling and support. www.e sa.i nt/E nabli ng_S uppor t/S pace_
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, Engine ering_T echno logy/A bout_C ross-c uttin g_i nitia tives.
as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the 17. Directorate of Tech, Eng. Quality, Clean Space: Space safety.
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate www.e sa.i nt/S pace_S afety/C lean_S pace/C lean_S pace2.
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 18. Directorate of Tech, Eng. Quality, Design to Produce. technology.
article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless esa.int/program/design-to-produce
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not 19. Directorate of Tech, Eng. quality, cybersecurity. technology.esa.
included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended int/program/cybersecurity
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted 20. Neugebauer, R.: Digital transformation. Springer, Berlin (2019)
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright 21. European Space Agency, Design 2 produce: seamless data cycle.
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://c reati vecom mons. www.e sa.i nt/E nabli ng_S uppor t/S pace_E ngine ering_T echno logy/
org/l icens es/b y/4.0 /. Design_2 _P roduc e
22. European Commission, A european strategy for data: Shaping
Europe’s digital future. digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/
strategy-data
References
23. Franklin, M., Halevy, A., Maier, D.: From databases to dataspaces.
SIGMOD Rec. 34, 27–33 (2005)
1. Pauliuk, S., Koslowski, M., Madhu, K., Schulte, S., Kilchert, S.: 24. Otto, B.: A federated infrastructure for European data spaces.
Co-design of digital transformation and sustainable development Commun. ACM 65, 44–45 (2022)
strategies—what socio-metabolic and industrial ecology research 25. European Space Agency, Definition of terms: LSI—large system
can contribute. J. Clean. Prod. 343, 130997 (2022) integrators. www.e sa.i nt/E nabli ng_S uppor t/P repar ing_f or_t he_
2. Bernabei, M., Eugeni, M., Gaudenzi, P., Costantino, F.: Assess- Future/D iscov ery_a nd_P repar ation/D efini tion_o f_t erms
ment of smart transformation in the manufacturing process of 26. Gassmann, O., Ferrandina, F. (eds.): Springer, Cham (2021)
aerospace components through a data-driven approach. Glob J 27. Group, W.; GAIA-X: Policy Rules and Architecture of Standards
Flex Syst Manag 24, 67–86 (2023) Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy(BMWi), Ber-
3. Lamb, K.: Challenges of digitalisation in the aerospace and avia- lin, Mai 2020, https://w ww.d ata-i nfras truct ure.e u/G AIAX/R edak
tion sectors, Apollo. University of Cambridge Cambridge Reposi- tion/E N/P ublic ation s/g aia-x-p olicy-r ulesa nd-a rchit ectur e-o f-s tand
tory, Cambridge (2018) ards.p df?__b lob=p ublic ation File& v=3
4. Giannopapa, C., Staveris-Poykalas, A., Metallinos, S.: Space as 28. Maier, B., Schulze, S.: Gaia-X federation services WP1: identity
an enabler for sustainable digital transformation: the new space and trust DE deep dive. Gaia-X European Association for Data
race and benefits for newcommers. Acta Astronaut. 198, 728–732 and Cloud AISBL, Brussels (2022)
(2022) 29. Martin Schallbruch, Digitale Identitäten—Kern-
5. Oliveira-Dias, D., Maqueira-Marín, J.M., Moyano-Fuentes, J.: The thema der Digitalisierung. digitale-identitaeten.de/
link between information and digital technologies of industry 40 digitale-identitaeten-kernthema-der-digitalisierung/
and agile supply chain: mapping current research and establishing 30. Niessen, T.: Gaia-X Federation Services WP4: Compliance DE
new research avenues. Comput Ind Eng 167, 108000 (2022) Deep Dive, gaia-X European Association for Data and Cloud
6. Croome, A.: European space comes of age. Nature 255, 436–437 AISBL. Belgium, Brussels (2022)
(1975) 31. eco—Association of the Internet Industry, software require-
7. European Space Agency: ESA annual report 2021, Internet (2022) ments specification for Gaia-X federation services compliance
8. National Aeronautics and Space Administration: FY 2021 Agency onboarding and accreditation workflows CP.OAW. www.g xfs.
Financial Report, Internet (2021) eu/d e/a ufnah me-u nd-a kkred itier ungsv erfah ren/
9. European Space Agency: Automation and artificial intelligence 32. Gaia-X Föderationsdienste, Aufnahme- und Akkreditierungs-
roadmap: A 2I Roadmap, Internet https://e soc.e sa.i nt/a 2i-r oadma p verfahren. www.g xfs.e u/d e/a ufnah me-u nd-a kkred itier ungsv erfa
10. Aschbacher, J.: Agenda 2025. France, Paris (2021) hren/
11. European Space Agency: Industrial policy and geographical dis- 33. Hänel, A., Seidel, A., Mehling, C.W., Dementyev, A., Kozak, K.,
tribution. www.e sa.i nt/A bout_U s/B usine ss_w ith_E SA/H ow_t o_ Seidel, R., Teicher, U., et al.: Impact of cyber-physically enhanced
do/I ndust rial_p olicy_a nd_g eogra phica l_d istri butio n manufacturing on the product requirement documentation in high-
12. Norman, A., Rohr, T., Ghidini, T.: Advanced manufacturing for tech applications. Procedia CIRP 102, 210–215 (2021)
space applications, European Space Agency,2023, https://t echn 34. Braud, A., Fromentoux, G., Radier, B., Le Grand, O.: The road to
ology.e sa.i nt/p rogra m/a dvanc ed-m anufa cturi ng european digital sovereignty with Gaia-X and IDSA. IEEE Netw.
13. Rohr, T.; The ESA advanced manufacturing initiative as innova- 35, 4–5 (2021)
tion driver for European space industry, Innov'action Aerospace 35. Otto, B., Burmann, A.: Europäische Dateninfrastrukturen. Infor-
4.0 Liège, Belgium, 17th April 2018, https://c dn2.b 2matc h.i o/ matik Spektrum 44, 283–291 (2021)
event/3 084/a ssets/8 47525 0769-d 3b6fe 41d5.p df 36. Schmück, K., Sturm, M., Gassmann, O.: Decentralized platform
14. Ongaro, F.; Development of a digital twin for advanced manu- ecosystems for data-sharing and digital trust in industrial environ-
facturing processes, GSTP Element 1 “Develop” Compendium ments. In: Gassmann, O., Ferrandina, F. (eds.) Connected busi-
2019, European Space Research and Technology Centre (ESTEC), ness, pp. 127–136. Springer, Cham (2021)
Noordwijk, The Netherlands, 28th October 2019, https://e scies. 37. eco—Association of the internet Industry, software requirements
org/d ownlo ad/w ebDoc ument File?i d=6 8361 specification for Gaia-X federation services federated catalogue
15. Hänel, A., Seidel, A., Frieß, U., Teicher, U., Wiemer, H., Wang, core catalogue features FC.CCF. C:/Users/seidelan/Downloads/
D., Wenkler, E., et al.: Digital twins for high-tech machining SRS_GXFS_FC_CCF-1.pdf.
applications—a model-based analytics-ready approach. JMMP 38. Otto, B., Jarke, M.: Designing a multi-sided data platform: find-
5, 80 (2021) ings from the International Data Spaces case. Electron Mark 29,
561–580 (2019)
1 3
Towards a seamless data cycle for space components: considerations from the growing European… 365
39. Pfrommer, J.: Gaia-X federation services WP2: federated cata- 59. Zuknik, K.-H., Seidel, A., Bavdaz, M., Wille, E., Ayre, M., Fer-
logue DE deep dive. Gaia-X European Association for Data and reira, I., Shortt, B. et al.: The ATHENA telescope and optics sta-
Cloud AISBL, Brussels (2022) tus. In: Pareschi, G., O'Dell, S.L. (eds.) Optics for EUV, X-ray,
40. Steinbuss, S.: Gaia-X federation services WP3: Sovereign Data and gamma-ray astronomy VIII. SPIE, Bellingham (2017–2017),
Exchange DE Deep Dive. Gaia-X European Association for Data p. 10
and Cloud AISBL, Brussels (2022) 60. Rando, N., Martin, D., Lumb, D., Verhoeve, P., Oosterbroek, T.,
41. Gaia-X Association, Gaia-X Association announces release of Bavdaz, M., Fransen, S., et al.: Status of the ESA L1 mission
compliance and labelling framework. gaia-x.eu/news/latest-news/ candidate ATHENA. In: Takahashi, T., Murray, S.S., den Herder,
gaia-x-association-announces-release-of-compliance-and-label- J.-W.A. (eds.) Space telescopes and instrumentation 2012: ultra-
ling-framework/. violet to gamma ray, p. 844328. SPIE, Bellingham (2012)
42. Weiss, C.: Gaia-X federation services WP5: portal and integration 61. Barcons, X., Barret, D., Decourchelle, A., Herder, J.W.D., Dotani,
DE deep dive. Gaia-X European Association for Data and Cloud T., Fabian, A.C., Fraga-Encinas, R. et al.: ATHENA (Advanced
AISBL, Brussels (2022) Telescope for High ENergy Astrophysics) assessment study report
43. Gaia-X European Association for Data and Cloud AISBL, Gaia- for ESA cosmic vision 2015–2025 (2012)
x-Architecture Document-22.04 Release. gaia-x.eu/wp-content/ 62. Bavdaz, M., Wille, E., Ayre, M.R., Ferreira, I., Shortt, B., Fransen,
uploads/2022/06/Gaia-x-Architecture-Document-22.04-Release. S., Collon, M.J., et al.: Optics developments for ATHENA. In:
pdf. Pareschi, G., O’Dell, S.L. (eds.) Optics for EUV, X-ray, and
44. Association, G.-X.: Gaia-X federation services work package 4: gamma-ray astronomy IX, p. 12. SPIE, Bellingham (2019)
compliance. Gaia-X European Association for Data and Cloud 63. Hänel, A., Schnellhardt, T., Wenkler, E., Nestler, A., Brosius, A.,
AISBL, Brussels (2022) Corinth, C., Fay, A., et al.: The development of a digital twin for
45. Seidel, A., Eisenmann, H.: Cyber-physical manufacture of a machining processes for the application in aerospace industry.
metallic optical bench demonstrator as possible option for the Procedia CIRP 93, 1399–1404 (2020)
Advanced Telescope for High Energy Astrophysics (ATHENA), 64. European Cooperation For Space Standardization: Space prod-
Noordwijk, The Netherlands (2023) uct assurance: Material selection for controlling stress-corrosion
46. André S.: Integral approach for hybrid manufacturing of large cracking(ECSS‐Q‐ST‐70‐36C), Noordwijk, The Netherlands,
structural titanium space components. Dissertation, Dresden ESA Requirements and Standards Division (2009). esmat.esa.
(2021) int/ecss-q-st-70–36c.pdf.
47. Sakaino, A.: International collaboration between data spaces and 65. Caesar, B., Hanel, A., Wenkler, E., Corinth, C., Ihlenfeldt, S.,
carrier networks. In: Otto, B., ten Hompel, M., Wrobel, S. (eds.) Fay, A.: Information model of a digital process twin for machin-
Designing data spaces, pp. 471–483. Springer, Cham (2022) ing processes. In: 2020 25th IEEE International Conference on
48. Margaria, T., Chaudhary, H.A.A., Guevara, I., Ryan, S., Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation (ETFA), IEEE,
Schieweck, A.: The interoperability challenge: building a model- 2020–2020, pp. 1765–1772
driven digital thread platform for CPS. In: Margaria, T., Steffen, 66. Ramadhan, R.S., Cabeza, S., Pirling, T., Kabra, S., Hofmann, M.,
B. (eds.) Leveraging applications of formal methods, verification RebeloKornmeier, J., Venter, A.M., et al.: Quantitative analysis
and validation, pp. 393–413. Springer, Cham (2021) and benchmarking of positional accuracies of neutron strain scan-
49. Jürjens, J., Scheider, S., Yildirim, F., Henke, M.: Tokenomics: ners. Nuclear Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A Accel. Spec-
decentralized incentivization in the context of data spaces. In: trom. Detect. Assoc Equip. 999, 165230 (2021)
Otto, B., ten Hompel, M., Wrobel, S. (eds.) Designing data spaces, 67. Renato I., Serena V., ODRL Information Model 2.2: https://w ww.
pp. 91–108. Springer, Cham (2022) w3.o rg/T R/2 018/R EC-o drl-m odel-2 01802 15/. www.w 3.o rg/T R/
50. Lange, C., Langkau, J., Bader, S.: The IDS information model: odrl-m odel/.
a semantic vocabulary for sovereign data exchange. In: Otto, B., 68. Barnstedt E., Lin, S.W., Boss, B., Malakuti, S., Scientist, S.,
ten Hompel, M., Wrobel, S. (eds.) Designing data spaces, pp. Clauer, E., Van Schalkwyk, P., Isaacs, D., Martins, T.W.: Open
111–127. Springer, Cham (2022) source drives digital twin adoption. J. Innov., 1–16 (2021), https://
51. Leveling, J., Schier, A., Sparer, D., Weißenberg, N.: IT-Architek- www.i icons ortiu m.o rg/p df/2 021_M arch_J oI_O pen_S ource_
tur für die silicon economy. In: ten Hompel, M., Henke, M., Otto, Drives_D igita l_T win_S A.p d
B. (eds.) Silicon economy, pp. 93–120. Springer, Berlin (2022) 69. Borgo, S., Leitão, P.: The role of foundational ontologies in manu-
52. Rousopoulou, V., Vafeiadis, T., Nizamis, A., Iakovidis, I., facturing domain applications. In: Hutchison, D., Kanade, T., Kit-
Samaras, L., Kirtsoglou, A., Georgiadis, K., et al.: Cognitive ana- tler, J., Kleinberg, J.M., Mattern, F., Mitchell, J.C., Naor, M., et al.
lytics platform with AI solutions for anomaly detection. Comput. (eds.) On the move to meaningful internet systems 2004: CoopIS,
Ind. 134, 103555 (2022) DOA, and ODBASE, pp. 670–688. Springer, Berlin (2004)
53. Bulut, S., Anderl, R.: Towards ecosystems with smart product- 70. Catena-X Automotive Network: The central component. catena-x.
service systems. Procedia CIRP 109, 221–226 (2022) net/en/angebote/edc-die-zentrale-komponente-fuer-die
54. T. Usländer, Industrie 4.0—Aktuelle Entwicklungen aus Sicht der
Informatik, Gesellschaft für Informatik, Bonn, Bonn (2021) Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
55. Redeker, M., Weskamp, J.N., Rossl, B., Pethig, F.: Towards a digi- jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
tal twin platform for industrie 4.0. In: 2021 4th IEEE International
Conference on Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems (ICPS), IEEE,
2021–2021, pp. 39–46
56. Beverungen, D., Hess, T., Köster, A., Lehrer, C.: From private
digital platforms to public data spaces: implications for the digital
transformation. Electron Markets 32, 493–501 (2022)
57. Frey, C., Hertweck, P., Richter, L., Warweg, O.: MobilityLab:
a living lab for the development and evaluation of AI-assisted
services. Smart Cities 5, 133–145 (2022)
58. Lanza, G., Peukert, S., Steier, G.L. (eds.): Elsevier, Amsterdam
(2022)
1 3