PROF. GRAHAM C ROBERTS (Orcid ID : 0000-0003-2252-1248)
DR. REBECCA CLAIRE KNIBB (Orcid ID : 0000-0001-5561-0904)
DR. EKATERINA KHALEVA (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-2220-7745)
DR. CHERRY ALVIANI (Orcid ID : 0000-0003-1527-0495)
DR. AUDREY DUNNGALVIN (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-1540-3959)
DR. CHARLOTTE G. MORTZ (Orcid ID : 0000-0001-8710-0829)
PROF. OLIVER PFAAR (Orcid ID : 0000-0003-4374-9639)
DR. HELENA PITE (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-7300-928X)
DR. ALEXANDRA SANTOS (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-7805-1436)
Article type : Guidelines
EAACI Guideline on the effective transition of adolescents and young adults with allergy and
asthma
Graham Roberts1-3, Marta Vazquez-Ortiz4, Rebecca
Knibb5, Ekaterina Khaleva1, Cherry Alviani1,3,
Elizabeth Angier6, Katharina Blumchen7, Pasquale
Comberiati8,9, Bettina Duca4,10, Audrey
DunnGalvin11,12, Teresa Garriga-Baraut13, Claudia
Gore4,10, M Hazel Gowland14, Valérie Hox15, Britt
Jensen16, Charlotte G Mortz16, Oliver Pfaar17,
Helena Pite18, Alexandra F. Santos19-21, Silvia
Sanchez-Garcia22, Frans Timmermans23
Affiliations:
1. Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK
This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not been
through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may lead to
differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as doi:
10.1111/ALL.14459
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
2. NIHR Southampton Biomedical Research Centre, University Hospital Southampton NHS
Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK
3. The David Hide Asthma and Allergy Research Centre, St Mary’s Hospital, Isle of Wight, UK
4. Section of Inflammation, Repair and Development, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College London. United Kingdom
5. Department of Psychology, School of Life and Health Sciences, Aston University, Birmingham,
UK
6. Primary Care and Population Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK
7. Department of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Paediatric Pneumology, Allergology and
Cystic Fibrosis, University Hospital Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
8. Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Section of Paediatrics, University of Pisa,
56126 Pisa, Italy
9. Department of Clinical Immunology and Allergology, I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State
Medical University, 119991 Moscow, Russia.
10. Department of Paediatrics, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK
11. Applied Psychology and Paediatrics and Child Health, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland
12. Paediatrics and Child Infectious Diseases, First Moscow State Medical University, Russia.
13. Unitat d'Allergologia Pediàtrica, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain. Grup
d’Investigació “Creixement i Desenvolupament”, Institut de Recerca de l’Hospital Universitari Vall
d’Hebron (VHIR), Barcelona, Spain.
14. Allergy Action, 23 Charmouth Road, St Albans, UK
15. Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospitals Saint-Luc,
Brussels, Belgium.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
16. Department of Dermatology and Allergy Centre, Odense Research Centre for Anaphylaxis
(ORCA), Odense University Hospital, Kloevervaenget 15, DK-5000 Odense C, Denmark
17. Oliver Pfaar, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Section of
Rhinology and Allergy, University Hospital Marburg, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Marburg,
Germany
18. Allergy Center, CUF Descobertas Hospital and CUF Infante Santo Hospital; CEDOC, Chronic
Diseases Research Center, NOVA Medical School/Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, Universidade
Nova de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal
19. Department of Women and Children’s Health (Paediatric Allergy), School of Life Course
Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine, King’s College London, London, United Kingdom
20. Peter Gorer Department of Immunobiology, School of Immunology and Microbial Sciences,
King’s College London, London, United Kingdom
21. Children’s Allergy Service, Guy’s and St Thomas’ Hospital, London, United Kingdom; Asthma
UK Centre in Allergic Mechanisms of Asthma, London, United Kingdom
22. Allergy Department, Hospital Infantil Universitario del Niño Jesús, Madrid, Spain
23. Nederlands Anafylaxis Netwerk – European Anaphylaxis Taskforce, Dordrecht, The
Netherlands
Address for correspondence:
Professor Graham Roberts, Paediatric Allergy and Respiratory Medicine, University
Child Health (MP803), University Hospital, Southampton NHS Foundation Trust,
Tremona Road, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK.
Tel.: +44 (0) 2380796160 E-mail: g.c.roberts@soton.ac.uk
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
Key words: adolescent, asthma, food allergy, rhinoconjunctivitis, transition, teenager, young
adult, allergy.
Short title: EAACI Recommendations on Adolescents and Young Adults
Word count: 4500
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
ABSTRACT
Adolescent and young adult (AYA) patients need additional support while they experience the challenges
associated with their age. They need specific training to learn the knowledge and skills required to
confidently self-manage their allergies and/or asthma. Transitional care is a complex process which should
address the psychological, medical, educational and vocational needs of AYA in the developmentally
appropriate way. The European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology has developed a clinical
practice guideline to provide evidence-based recommendations for healthcare professionals to support
the transitional care of AYA with allergy and/or asthma. This guideline was developed by a multi-
disciplinary working panel of experts and patient representatives based on two recent systematic reviews.
It sets out a series of general recommendations on operating a clinical service for AYA, which include: (i)
starting transition early (11-13 years), (ii) using a structured, multidisciplinary approach, (iii) ensuring AYA
fully understand their condition and have resources they can access, (iv) active monitoring of adherence
and (v) discussing any implications for further education and work. Specific allergy and asthma transition
recommendations include (i) simplifying medication regimes and using reminders; (ii) focusing on areas
where AYA are not confident and involving peers in training AYA patients; (iii) identifying and managing
psychological and socioeconomic issues impacting disease control and quality of life; (iv) enrolling the
family in assisting AYA to undertake self-management and (v) encouraging AYA to let their friends know
about their allergies and asthma. These recommendations may need to be adapted to fit into national
healthcare systems.
Abbreviations
AGREE II - Appraisal of Guidelines for Research & Evaluation
AYA- Adolescent(s)and young adult(s)
CBT- Cognitive behavioural therapy
EAACI – European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology
HCP- Healthcare professional(s)
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
HEADSS -Home, Education/ Employment, peer group, Activities, Drugs, Sexuality, Suicide/ depression)
assessment
HRQL – health related quality of life
MI- Motivational interviewing
QOL- Quality of life
TF – Task Force
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
INTRODUCTION
Adolescents and young adults (AYA) represent a large group of patients with allergy and/or
asthma. Their medical care is complicated by the biological and psychosocial changes that occur
during adolescence. As AYA gain increasing autonomy, they also have to become more socially
and financially independent, whilst their primary relationships switch from family to peer-based
interactions. It is now acknowledged that these changes encompass a much longer period than
previously thought1, continuing until around 25 years of age. For these reasons, this guideline
focuses on the 11-25 year age group.
The challenges faced by adolescence and early adulthood impact both on the symptoms they
experience and how these are managed; they also impact on how the symptoms and
management are perceived and accepted. AYA may not fully understand the consequences of
diseases. They may fail to take responsibility for self-management, leading to suboptimal
adherence to treatment and other negative effects. This period of life is particularly challenging
because it occurs when AYA undergo numerous life events linked with changes in education,
work, travel and the establishment of more mature relationships. In addition, many AYA are
transferred from paediatric to adult medical services, at the same time as they may experience a
sense of loss and fear of the unknown which may lead to failure to follow up and more frequent
hospitalizations.
Developmentally appropriate healthcare (DAH) recognizes the biopsychosocial developmental
changes of AYA and the need to empower young people by embedding health education and
health promotion in consultations. It is critical for AYA to acquire the knowledge, skills and
confidence required to become independent, competent and expert adult patients. This process
is known as transition (Box 1) and entails much more than the simple transfer of a patient from
paediatric to adult care. The process of transition is also important when an allergy clinic caters
for all age groups. If effectively learnt and utilized, constructive self-management skills will serve
to support patients throughout their adult lives enabling them to achieve better health
outcomes. We know from a recent European survey that healthcare professionals (HCP) find AYA
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
to be a challenging group to manage.2 To understand how to approach this age group, it is
necessary to understand what is happening during adolescence.
What is happening during adolescence?
Changes in the brain underpin many changes during adolescence as both complex abstract
thought and maturity in decision-making develop. Research in developmental psychology and
neuroscience reveals that during adolescence there is an imbalance between systems supporting
reactivity and regulation. Prefrontal areas are still developing until late adolescence (>18–21
years), while hypersensitive reward systems have already evolved, creating a disparity between
emotions and control. Behavioural economics has shown that risk-taking is not a simple process,
and is not only affected by attitudes toward known risks but also by attitudes toward unknown
or ambiguous situations, in which the likelihood of positive and negative outcomes are not
known.6 It is not that adolescents choose to engage in risks, but, rather, they are willing to
gamble when they lack complete knowledge. When adolescents meaningfully understand a risky
situation, they are even more risk-averse than adults.6 In addition, adolescent decision-making
typically occurs in busy environments that often involve complex motivations. Prominent
motivations at this age, which can compete and conflict with one another, include maintaining
status with peers, achieving goals in academic, athletic, or other areas, finding independence and
maintaining harmony within the family.
The guideline on the effective transition of adolescents and young adults
This guideline has been prepared by the European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology’s
Task Force (TF) on Adolescents and Young Adults. It aims to assist HCP in transitioning 11-25 year
age patients with asthma and other allergic conditions. In addition, the TF aims to identify gaps in
knowledge and implementation, unmet needs and potential future perspectives. The primary
audience for this guideline is clinical allergists (specialists and subspecialists), paediatricians,
primary care workers, physicians from other related disciplines, nurses, dieticians, social workers
and psychologists working across a range of primary, secondary, and tertiary care settings.
Healthcare managers, research funding bodies and health policy makers may also find this
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
guideline useful. The development of the guideline has been informed by two formal systematic
reviews7,8 with systematic review principles being used to identify additional evidence, where
necessary. The guideline does not intend to provide advice about the management of individual
allergic conditions in AYA. A separate manuscript will provide practical advice on how to
Box 1. Key terms
Adherence: the extent to which patients take medication as prescribed by their doctor.
Adolescents and young adults: patients with allergy and/or asthma aged 11-25 years.
Adolescents and young adult-centred care: medical care that focuses on the needs of the adolescent and
young adult, the specific format will depend on the developmental level of the patient.
Allergic conditions: asthma, urticaria, drug and venom allergy, anaphylaxis, eczema, food allergy and
allergic rhino-conjunctivitis, allergic gastrointestinal disease.
Cognitive behavioural therapy: psychological approach to changing people's beliefs and behaviours by
focusing on the interaction between thoughts, images, beliefs, emotions, physical symptoms and
behaviours.
Developmentally-appropriate healthcare: format takes into account the developmental level of the
patient
Health literacy: ability to obtain, read, understand and use healthcare information and make appropriate
healthcare decisions including following treatment plans.
Health-related quality of life: quantification of the impact of illness on physical, mental, emotional and
social life of a patient.
Motivational interviewing: psychological approach that aims to help an individual develop motivation to
make positive decisions and achieve specific goals.
Multi-systemic approach: psychological, family-based intervention adapted for the treatment of poor
illness management.
Patient activation measures: assessment of patient’s knowledge, skill and confidence for managing their
health and healthcare.
Peer-led interventions: the teaching or sharing of health information, values and behaviours between
individuals peers.
Transition: ‘an active and evolving process that addresses the medical, psychosocial, and educational
needs of young people as they prepare to move from child- to adult-centred health care’.17
Transfer: moving from paediatric to an adult healthcare system.
Transition readiness assessment tool: questionnaire completed by the patient or healthcare professional
to assess the AYA competency with self-management of their allergy and asthma (e.g. ‘ready, steady, go’
or hospital’s own document).
Transition report: detailed written medical report to adult specialist summarizing the paediatric care.
implement these transition recommendations into everyday clinical practice and give examples
Self-management: decisions and behaviours that a patient with allergy and asthma takes to manage their
health conditions.
about how to organize a transition clinic and optimise service delivery.
Stakeholders: people or groups of people that have an interest in the area.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
METHODOLOGY
This guideline was generated using the principles of the Guidelines International Network using
the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research & Evaluation (AGREE II) approach 9,10 (see online
supplement – appendix 1). The process started in January 2018 with a web-based discussion
about the process and the key clinical areas to address, followed by face-to-face meetings and
regular web conferences in which HCP and lay representatives participated.
Ensuring appropriate stakeholder involvement
Members of the EAACI TF on Adolescents and Young Adults from 10 European countries
represented a range of disciplinary and clinical backgrounds, including allergists (specialists and
subspecialists), paediatricians, psychologists, primary care, dermatologists, otolaryngologists,
nurses and patient organization representatives. Additionally, a survey of stakeholders was
undertaken in June 2019 to understand how adolescents and young adults are currently
managed and the challenges faced by their HCP.2
Systematic reviews of the evidence
Three key questions were addressed: (i) What are the challenges and specific needs of
adolescents and young adults with allergic conditions, including asthma, food allergy and
anaphylaxis, allergic rhino-conjunctivitis, atopic dermatitis, chronic urticaria, allergic
gastrointestinal disease, as well as those with complex multisystem allergic disease? (ii) What
specific strategies have proven useful to improve self-management and wellbeing in this
population? (iii) What generic approaches are helpful when managing adolescents and young
adults? The first two were pursued through two formal systematic reviews (SRs) of the evidence
with a cut-off date of February 10, 2019.7,8 The final question was assessed by a SR of the
evidence-based adolescent and young adult guidelines from the last 5 years with a cut-off date of
June 21, 2019. Individual studies from these guidelines were accessed to determine level of
evidence and grade of recommendation. The TF members continued to track evidence published
after our systematic review cut-off date and, where relevant, studies were considered by the TF
chairs.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
Box 2. Assigning levels of evidence and strength of recommendations
Level of evidence
Level I Systematic reviews, meta-analysis, randomized controlled trials
Level II Two groups, non-randomized studies (e.g., cohort, case–control)
Level III One group, non-randomized (e.g., before and after, pre-test, and post-test)
Level IV Descriptive studies that include analysis of outcomes (single-subject design, case series)
Level V Case reports and expert opinion that include narrative literature, reviews, and consensus
statements
Grades of recommendation
Grade A Consistent level I studies
Grade B Consistent level II or III studies or extrapolations from level I studies
Grade C Level IV studies or extrapolations from level II or III studies
Grade D Level V evidence or troublingly inconsistent or inconclusive studies at any level
Strength of recommendations
Strong Evidence from studies at low risk of bias
Moderate Evidence from studies at moderate risk of bias
Weak Evidence from studies at high risk of bias
Recommendations are phrased according to the grade of recommendation:
 Grade A: “is recommended”
 Grade B: “can be recommended”
 Grade C: “may be recommended”
 Grade D: “may be considered”
Approach adapted from Oxford Centre for Evidence-based Medicine - Levels of Evidence and Grades of
Recommendations.11 The adaptation involved providing an assessment of the risk of bias, based on the
Cochrane risk of bias tool, of the underpinning evidence and highlighting other potentially relevant contextual
information plus basing recommendation phrases on the grade.
Formulating recommendations
The TF members graded the strength and consistency of the key findings from the SRs.7,8 These
were used to formulate evidence-based recommendations for clinical care based on the relative
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
balance between potential benefits, side effects and risks.11 (Box 2). This involved formulating
clear recommendations with the strength of evidence underpinning each recommendation while
phrasing was according to the grade of recommendation (Box 2). For many recommendations in
the generic section, there was only level V evidence available (Grade D), therefore, ‘may be
considered’ is used. To ensure that these recommendations were robust, a modified Delphi
approach was used to achieve consensus within the TF (see online supplement).
The TF aimed to minimize bias at every step. TF members identified the resource implications of
implementing the recommendations, barriers, facilitators, potential approaches to the
implementation of each recommendation and suggested audit criteria to help with assessing
organizational compliance.
Peer review and public comment
The draft guideline was externally peer-reviewed by invited experts from a range of professional
backgrounds. The draft was also made available on public domain on the EAACI web site for a 3-
week period in February to March 2020 to allow a broader array of stakeholders to comment. All
feedback was considered by the TF members and, where appropriate, revisions were made.
Further feedback should be addressed to the corresponding author. Additionally, AYA and their
parents/carers were invited to consider the importance that they attached to each draft
recommendation during the development of the guideline (for further details see online
supplement). All recommendations achieved a median of important or very important in both
groups.
Identification of evidence gaps
The process of developing this guideline has identified a number of evidence gaps which were
prioritized (Table 8).
Editorial independence and managing conflict of interests
This guideline was funded and supported by EAACI. The funder did not have any influence on the
guideline production process, on its contents or on the decision to publish. TF members’ conflicts
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
of interest were declared and taken into account by the TF chairs as recommendations were
formulated.
Updating the Guideline
EAACI plans to update this guideline in 2025 unless there are important advances before then.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
GENERAL TRANSITION (Table 1)
Eight guidelines focusing on the transition of AYA with juvenile-onset rheumatic arthritis12,13,
coeliac disease14, gastroenterological conditions15,16, liver diseases17, young people using health
or social care services18 and AYA with special health care needs19 were identified from the last
five years. Most of the evidence stemmed from expert opinion derived from clinical experience
or qualitative studies reviewed systematically; very few randomized controlled trials were
referenced.
Starting transition
Preparation for transition may be considered from early adolescence (11-13 years) in accordance
with the patient’s developmental stage (Grade D).13-19 This will allow AYA to gradually acquire
new knowledge about their disease and develop self-management skills, allowing them to take
increasing responsibility for their medical care. It is generally agreed that the optimal timing for
initiation of the transition process cannot be based on chronological age. An individualised,
flexible approach is required. The following factors might be considered by HCPs to determine
the ideal age to start the transition process: mental and physical development, disease activity,
health literacy, adherence to treatment, autonomy in disease management, family’s
socioeconomic circumstances and school format (due to increased patient responsibility as move
up the schooling system).
Transition readiness questionnaires are tools which consist of a list of desirable skills and
educational targets that AYA should ideally meet before transfer to adult care.13,15,17,19 There is a
lack of validated readiness assessment tools for AYA with allergy and/or asthma but several
generic tools are available such as Transition Readiness Assessment Questionnaire20, “Ready,
Steady, Go”21 and TR(x)ANSITION Scale22. HCP may consider using one throughout the transition
process to track progress and identify areas where AYA need more help to build knowledge and
understanding, autonomy and self-management skills (Grade D).
Involving the AYA, family and other HCP
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
Collaboration and engagement of all stakeholders are essential for a successful and smooth
transition process. Transition can be complex and more difficult in patients with multiple allergic
diseases. It is important that the family are involved in supporting AYA self-management, thereby
encouraging independence. During the transition process, HCPs may consider helping AYA (with
their parents/caregivers) to understand their allergy and asthma, possible complications,
treatment rationale (including medication name, dosing, possible side effects), effective
management strategies and how to recognize higher risk symptoms (Grade D).12,15,16,18,19
Important skills for AYA to learn are how to make appointments, identify when and whom to
contact in case of relapse, how to negotiate and understand the transition process and how to
access the support available. AYA should ideally be offered portable, accessible information in
the form of leaflets, web-pages, or audio for AYA to foster inclusivity and address diverse needs.
It may be also helpful for AYA to have their own personal transition plan, developed together
with a HCP and written in a form of a ‘roadmap’ towards agreed short and long term goals and
desired outcomes for transition. As adolescents are generally characterized by low levels of
adherence, HCP may consider monitoring this more closely during the transition process (Grade
D).12,14-17 It has been shown that AYA are more likely to follow treatment plans and attend adult
service medical appointments when they have a good knowledge of their disease and the
reasons for treatment23,24 and good family support.25
Wider aspects to consider
Another important aspect that HCP may consider covering during the transition process is
developing skills related to self-management of allergy and/or asthma, within current and
potential future education or work (Grade D).12,15,18,19 Other areas for discussion may be life
skills, future health concerns, educational and employment goals, independent living and
housing options, financial needs, psychosocial aspects, mental health, drugs and alcohol, healthy
sexuality and reproduction. HEADSS (Home, Education/ Employment, peer group, Activities,
Drugs, Sexuality, Suicide/ depression) assessment is a helpful framework for such discussions.26
Apart from medical appointments, other options for communication between HCP and AYA such
as phone calls, web-based or mobile technologies, can be recommended to improve the
effectiveness of the transition process (Grade B).15,17,18
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
Integrated regional approach involving paediatric and adult services
For optimal outcomes, a structured, multidisciplinary transition programme with a shared
regional or network protocol developed by HCP, AYA, and parents/carers may be considered
(Grade D).12,13,15,17-19 This could include age-appropriate written information. Several guidelines
have suggested that regular meetings may be considered between paediatric and adult HCP
improve the effectiveness of the transition programme (Grade D).16,17 If transfer to another
clinical service is required, it would be helpful for the AYA to have had a recent comprehensive
review of allergic conditions to optimize their management plan and generate an up to date
transition report. This would cover the AYA’s medical history, treatments, emergency care plan,
follow-up, comorbidities and any other relevant information. Furthermore, an integrated
transition programme would be helpful with input from paediatric and adult providers and
primary care, ideally as part of the well-coordinated multidisciplinary team. This may be
considered to include a period of overlap between these services to help build relationships and
establish effective adult care and management (Grade D).12-19 Feedback from the adult to the
paediatric clinic and primary care about AYA’s attendance, circumstances and any changes in
management is essential for continuity of the medical care and flow of information between all
HCPs involved in the individual’s care.
Training and audit
To achieve a good transition pathway, HCPs may need training to help them understand the
developmental aspects of AYAs, the transition process, and how to engage AYA in behavioural
change (Grade C).12,13,19 It may be useful to have a lead HCP to coordinate the transition process
and training as well as being the contact person for AYA and parents/carers. Lastly, regular audit
of a transition service may be recommended to assess key performance indicators and improve
service provision (Grade C).15,18,19 Audits should involve AYAs and families, policy and decision
makers, administrators, researchers, HCPs and government agencies.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
Table 1. Generic recommendations for adolescents and young adults with allergy and/or asthma
Generic recommendations Other considerations References*
(Grade, Evidence level)
Preparation for transition may be considered from HCP may want to consider the following when deciding when to start the transition process: Foster13; Elli16; CAPHC19;
early adolescence (11-13 years) in accordance with mental and physical development, disease activity, health literacy, adherence to treatment, Vajro17; NICE18;
the patient’s developmental stage (D, IV-V) autonomy in disease management, family’s socioeconomic circumstances and school format. Brooks15; Ludvigsson
201614
For a transition model to be effective, the following may be considered for inclusion:
- the use of a structured, multidisciplinary Shared regional protocol agreed with HCP, AYA, parents/careers, HCP and regularly updated at Calvo, 201512; Foster,
transition programme within the least every 5 years. This could include age-appropriate written information and structured 201613; Brooks15;
clinic/healthcare unit (D, I-V) transition communication/reports between all paediatric and adult HCP. It may be helpful to CAPHC19; NICE18, Vajro17
have a lead person to coordinate the transition process and be a contact person for HCP, AYA
and parents/carers.
- informing AYA and parents/caregivers HCP may want to consider including the following information: purpose of transfer to an adult Brooks15; Calvo12; Elli16;
about allergy and/or asthma as well as the setting and what to expect when they come there; location of available adult centres, disease CAPHC19; NICE18
transition processes and the support characteristics, treatments (including side effects), how to recognize alarm symptom, how to
available in a form that is appropriate for assist AYAs to take on their own care and support available. Ideas for formats: leaflets, web-
page, audio for AYA with disabilities. It may be helpful for AYA to have their own personal
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
their developmental stage (D, I-V) transition plan17,19.
- a checklist of skills and knowledge to Tools can be used several times throughout the transition process in order to identify which CAPHC19; Vajro17;
assess AYA readiness for transition (D, I-V) areas of AYA self-management and well-being need to be addressed and improved. There are Brooks15; Foster13
no specific allergy and asthma tools but generic ones are available: Transition Readiness
Assessment Questionnaire20, “Ready, Steady, Go”21 and TR(x)ANSITION Scale 22.
- active monitoring of adherence to Adherence may benefit from targeted specific educational and organisational interventions, e.g.
Calvo12; Brooks15;
treatment through the transition process more frequent appointments15 , repeated education. A good open dialogue and communication
Vajro17; Ludvigsson14;
(D, I-V) is important. AYA with "new onset" of a disease will have minimal prior experience and so need
Elli16
more input.
-a period of overlap between paediatric Where AYA care needs to be moved to another service clinic, AYA medical information (ideally in Calvo12; Foster, 201613;
and adult care providers before AYA is the form of a transition report) should be transferred to the adult medical service. Where Elli16; CAPHC19; NICE18;
transferred, then feedback from the adult possible, AYA should be seen in a joint paediatric-adult clinic, AYA should ideally see the same Ludvigsson14; Brooks15;
to the paediatric clinic about their HCP in adults' services for at least the first 2 attended appointments after transfer 18. Vajro17
attendance and any changes in
management (D, I-V)
- regular meetings between paediatric and Particular focus should be placed on more complex patients. Meetings could be virtual. Process Elli16;Vajro17
adult care providers (D, I-V) could be informed by areas of the assessment tools e.g. adherence, disease activity outcomes,
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
HEADSS26.
Other options for effective communication Options may include web-based communication boards and digital communication tools such as Vajro17;Brooks15; NICE18
between HCP and AYA can be recommended (eg text.
web-based, mobile technologies) (B, I-V)
Discussion of self-management of AYA allergy Areas that HCP may want to consider discussing lifestyle, future health concerns, educational Calvo12; CAPHC19;
and/or asthma within current and potential future and employment goals, independent living and housing options, financial needs, psychosocial, NICE18; Brooks15
college, university, work or social environments mental health, sexuality and reproduction. Particular attention is required while taking exams,
may be considered (D, I-V) especially in AYA with allergic rhinitis. Additional help may be needed from other
professionals, eg psychologist, social and youth worker.
Specific training in transitional and AYA care may Training in generic transition process, disease-specific and developmentally-appropriate care Calvo12; Foster13;
be recommended for all HCP involved in transition (e.g. clinical experience, e-learning, workshops) as part of the continuing professional CAPHC19
process (C, II-V) development. Developmentally-appropriate healthcare should be practiced.
Regular audit of a transition service may be Audit should involve AYA and families, policy and decision makers, administrators, researchers, Brooks15; CAPHC19;
recommended to assess key performance HCP and government agencies. NICE18
indicators and improve service provision (C, I-V)
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
*Recommendations: Foster 201713, juvenile-onset rheumatic diseases; Ludvigsson 201614, coeliac disease, Brooks 201715, chronic digestive diseases; Vajro
201817, liver; NICE 201518, young people using health or social care services; Calvo 201512; rheumatic patients with childhood onset; Elli 201516,
gastroenterological patients; CAPHC 201619, AYA with special health care needs.
AYA, adolescents and young adults; HCP, healthcare professionals; NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence; CAPHC, Canadian Association of
Paediatric Health Centres, HEADSS (Home, Education/ Employment, peer group, Activities, Drugs, Sexuality, Suicide/ depression) assessment.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
TRANSITION SPECIFIC TO ALLERGIC CONDITIONS AND/OR ASTHMA
Recommendations specific to allergic conditions and/or asthma were developed by the TF based
on the two underpinning systematic reviews.7,8
Improving adherence (Tables 2, 4 and 5)
There are numerous data documenting poor adherence to treatment during adolescence. This is
therefore an important issue to consider. HCP should make time to explore barriers which may
be related to the patient, particularly their understanding and preconceptions, competing
activities, their support or medication regime. Simplifying medication regimes, such as the use of
a single inhaler combining inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting β2 agonists, may be
recommended to improve adherence (Grade C)(Table 2).27 Several studies indicate that low self-
efficacy (confidence in performing a specific activity) is related to poor medication adherence,
both in AYA with asthma and/or food allergy.28,29,30-33 One controlled study showed that text
reminders to take medication could improve treatment adherence in AYA with asthma 34;
however, the number of participants was small and this finding needs to be confirmed by larger
studies. Other types of reminders, such as prompts to take medication, mobile applications and
web-based applications, monitors or routines can be recommended to improve adherence,
symptom control and quality of life (Grade B)(Table 2).35-38 One study with a large sample
showed a positive effect of cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) using a multi-systemic approach
on asthma treatment adherence, as well as on asthma knowledge, self-management and
symptom control in adolescents. Cognitive behavioural therapy can be recommended to improve
adherence (Grade B)(Table 4).39-42 Also, data suggest that amending family routines to give AYA
time to fit in management behaviours may be recommended to improve adherence with
medication in AYA (Grade C)(Table 5).43,44 Finally, avoidance strategies such as dietary restrictions
and label reading are also very important but there is little literature to guide the best approach
to improving patient adherence to these strategies.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
Table 2. Adherence recommendations for adolescents and young adults with allergy and/or asthma
Simplifying medication regimes may be recommended to improve adherence (Grade C, Evidence level IV)
Strength of recommendation: Weak recommendation with evidence coming Other considerations: Evidence comes from the use of combined References: Axelsson27.
from a single study involving participants with asthma from 22 years of corticosteroid and long-acting bronchodilator inhalers for asthma
age.27 but is likely to be generalizable. If possible use the same inhaler
system for all inhaled medications for the same patient and if
possible restrict to once daily.
Medication reminders, mobile applications and web-based applications, monitors or routines can be recommended to improve adherence, symptom control and quality of life
(Grade B, Evidence level I-IV)
Strength of recommendation: Weak recommendation for smartphone- Other considerations: A smartphone-based personalized health References: Naimi35,
based health applications, medication reminders or monitors as only app, medication reminders or monitors were suggested in Blaakman36, Koster38, Johnson34.
suggested by qualitative studies.35,36,38 Recommendation for the use of a qualitative studies.
specific web-application (MyMediHealthApp) is moderate since efficacy
All studies focused on asthma but likely to be also applicable to
proven by a controlled trial.34
allergy.
AYA, adolescents and young adults.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
Optimising self-management (Table 3)
Empowering AYA with self-management skills can help them become autonomous, expert
patients, minimising their dependency on parents and HCP. It is therefore essential that AYA
have the knowledge and skills to ensure they can self-manage their allergies and/or asthma
effectively and confidently. Focusing consultations on areas where AYA say they are not
confident may be recommended to improve self-management including adherence (Grade C).28-
33 Barriers to successful self-management such as poor symptom perception and failure to take
responsibility need to be addressed.7 Facilitators to self-management which could be employed
are the use of routines, simple treatment regimes, better understanding, a positive attitude and
support from family, friends and school/college.7
To facilitate self-management, a personal action plan may be recommended to assist AYA in self-
managing their allergy and/or asthma (Grade C).29,31,45,46 Plans should be developed with the AYA
and parents/carers which could be smartphone-based.46
Peer-led interventions are recommended to improve asthma-related quality of life, asthma
knowledge, and to reduce asthma-related doctor visits and school absence (Grade A).47-51
Adolescents are likely to mirror the behaviour of their peers. To date, these peer-led
interventions have been demonstrated in randomised controlled trials for AYA with asthma; they
may also be useful for other allergic conditions.
AYA with allergy and/or asthma are frequently excluded from activities, which may have an
impact on their developing social skills. Consideration may be given to supporting the AYA, family
and the wider community to allow AYA to be included in social events (Grade D).52-55 This may
involve encouraging them to focus on sports that are less likely to exacerbate asthma (e.g.
swimming) or undertake sport at times when symptoms are less likely to be triggered (e.g.
avoiding cold mornings or pollen peaks). Ensuring that the menu for school trips or parties does
not contain relevant food allergens will be helpful for some AYA; it is therefore important that
AYA develop the necessary self-advocacy communication skills to inform organisers about their
allergy. Additionally, educating teachers, club staff, and other parents about allergy/or and
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
asthma is important as mistaken beliefs can present a barrier to effective communication and
integration in social contexts.52,55
Motivational interviewing (MI) can be recommended to improve understanding and perception
of the disease and adherence, thereby reducing asthma symptoms and improving quality of life
(Grade B).56 MI has been widely used in medicine and other settings in this age group. The
approach seeks to increase motivation to change behaviours and then encourages the AYA to set
goals for themselves. Training is required for HCP to effectively utilise MI.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
Table 3. Self-management recommendations for adolescents and young adults with allergy and/or asthma
Focusing consultation on areas where AYA say they are not confident may be recommended to improve self-management including adherence (Grade C, Evidence level IV)
Strength of recommendation: Weak recommendation based on low risk of bias in cross- Other considerations: Barriers to self-management References: Rhee28,
sectional 28,30 and qualitative studies29,31-33. These included AYA with both asthma28,33 and associated with poor self-efficacy should be identified so Saleh-Langenberg30,
food allergy29-32. that specific measures can be taken to overcome these.7 Jones31, Jones29,
MacAdam32, Holley33
Formulation of a personal action plan with the AYA and their family to enable them to self-manage their allergy and asthma may be recommended (Grade C, Evidence level
1-IV)
Other considerations: Smartphone based personalized References: Perry46, Strength of recommendation: Weak to moderate recommendation based on high risk of
action plan may lead to improvement in asthma control Jones29, Jones31,
bias in one randomized controlled trial46 and on low risk bias in cross-sectional
test46. Other formats may be preferred by some AYA. A plan Warren45
studies29,31,45. These included AYA with both asthma46 and food allergy29,31,45.
should be in used from before adolescence and be regularly
reviewed by all patient’s HCPs.
Peer-led interventions are recommended to improve asthma related quality of life, asthma knowledge, and to reduce asthma related doctor visits and school absence (Grade
A, Evidence level I)
Other considerations: Peers included in the studies were References: Al-
Strength of recommendation: Strong recommendation based on low47,51 and moderate
older AYA from similar backgrounds, either with or without Sheyab47 , Gibson48,
risk of bias 48-50 interventional studies focusing on AYA with asthma. Three studies
asthma, trained to ‘teach’ allergic teens. This approach is Rhee49, Rhee50, Shah51
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
assessed the impact of the Triple A programme47,48,51. also likely to be useful for other allergic conditions. There is
the potential that peers model suboptimal behaviours; good
selection and training processes are needed.
Supporting the AYA, family and the wider community to allow the AYA inclusion in social events (e.g. sports, celebrations, holidays) may be considered (Grade D, Evidence
level IV)
Strength of recommendation: Weak recommendation based on low risk of bias in a cross- Other considerations: Aim for better participation, less References: Winn55,
sectional study55 and qualitative studies52-54. These included AYA with either asthma53-55 bullying and gaining fitness. For example, there are sports, Mackenzie52,
or food allergy52. such as swimming, that less likely to trigger asthma. Mammen54,
Adopting specific strategies may allow AYA with food Mammen53
allergy. or asthma to safely participate in trips, parties and
other social events.
Motivational interviewing can be recommended to improve asthma symptoms and quality of life (Grade B, Evidence level I)
Strength of recommendation: Moderate recommendation based on one randomised Other considerations: This needs the active involvement of Reference: Seid56
controlled asthma trial56. Motivational interviewing has been demonstrated to be the AYA. Motivational interviewing includes strategies to
effective across many areas and is likely to also be helpful with allergy. increase motivation, shared decision making and goal
setting.
AYA, adolescents and young adults. HCP, Healthcare professional.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
Addressing psychological issues (Table 4)
Many AYA with allergy and/or asthma have co-existing psychological issues, including anxiety,
depression, suicidal ideation, and relational difficulties.33,57-74 These problems may magnify the
complexities of self-management, care coordination and treatment planning in AYA with allergy
and/or asthma. Therefore, the identification and management of psychological issues impacting
disease control and health-related quality of life can be recommended (Grade B).
It is known that the social context of a person’s life determines the risk of exposure, as well as
their susceptibility, the course and outcome of illness.75,76 Socioeconomic factors and stressful
life events can impact disease control34,77-81 and HRQL in allergic diseases64,70,82,83. Therefore, the
identification and management of socioeconomic issues and stressful life events impacting
disease control and HRQL may be recommended (Grade C).
Where AYA are struggling to successfully self-manage their asthma, psychological interventions
using a CBT based or multi-systemic therapy approach can be recommended to improve asthma
knowledge, improve adherence, self-management and symptom control (Grade B).39-42 This is
based on a small number of randomised controlled asthma trials. Similar approaches are likely to
be helpful where allergy is the key problem.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
Table 4. Psychosocial recommendations for adolescents and young adults with allergy and/or asthma
Identification and management of psychological issues impacting disease control and health related quality of life can be recommended (Grade B, Evidence level II-III)
Strength of recommendation: Moderate recommendation based on low References:
Other considerations: Many AYA with asthma and allergy have associated
risk of bias in quantitative cross-sectional57,62,63,65-73 and quantitative Bruzzese57,Bruzzese72,
psychological issues. Tools such as HEADSS26 or YouthCHAT84,85may be
cohort studies64. These included AYA with asthma57,62-64,68,71-73, atopic 73, Ferro64;
helpful in identifying problems that can then be addressed and
dermatitis65-67,69 and food allergy70. Halvorsen65,
managed85 in an appropriate way.
Kim66,Lee67,Lu68,
Noh69,Polloni70,
Shankar71,Hullmann63.
Identification and management of socioeconomic issues and stressful life events impacting disease control and health related quality of life may be recommended (Grade C,
Evidence level II-IV)
Strength of recommendation: Moderate recommendation based on low References:
Other considerations: Examples include factors that may impact on quality
risk of bias in quantitative cross-sectional 69,81,82, quantitative cohort64,79 Ferro64,Hedman82,Am
of life including divorce, bankruptcy, bereavement and recent severe
and quantitative case series studies83. AYA had asthma79,81-83, atopic aral83,Noh69,Stridsma
allergic reactions.69,82,83 Potential financial barriers should be explored in
dermatitis69 and food allergy64. n81,Sundell79.
young adults. These areas need to be explored in a sensitive way.
Psychological interventions using a cognitive behavioural therapy based or multi-systemic therapy approach can be recommended to improve adherence, asthma
knowledge, self-management and symptom control (Grade B, Evidence level I)
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
Strength of recommendation: Moderate recommendation due to specific Other considerations: Evidence for asthma knowledge, self-management References: Naar41,
population39,41,42 based on low to intermediate risk of bias in one and symptom control, mainly involving African American AYA with asthma Ellis39, Naar-King42,
randomized controlled trial39,41,42,66and a randomized pilot trial40. in one study39,41,42. It is possible that findings may be extrapolated to other Bruzzese40.
Psychological interventions can be considered for AYA who are struggling conditions. However, more studies are needed. These interventions are
to successfully self-manage their asthma. likely to be most effective for specific patients, for example those
struggling to self-manage. The active involvement of the AYA is essential
for success. The psychologist should have a good understanding of allergy
and asthma.
AYA, adolescents and young adults; HEADSS (Home, Education/ Employment, peer group, Activities, Drugs, Sexuality, Suicide/ depression) assessment.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
Obtaining support (Table 5)
Supportive relationships have been shown to have a positive impact on the management and
control of asthma and/or allergic disease and in the overall well-being of AYA. Effective
communication and fostering positive views about treatment can improve self-management,
adherence, asthma control and quality of life.33,35,38,43,44,53,58,86-89 An unsupportive family
environment has been associated with poor outcomes.86 Adolescents tend not to report asthma
symptoms to their parents and care-givers. Enrolling the family in assisting the AYA to undertake
self-management of their asthma and allergy may be recommended (Grade C).33,35,38,43,44,53,58,86-89
This can be gradually achieved over time, as appropriate to the age of the AYA. Simple
modifications to the family’s routines to create time to take treatment may assist with adherence
to therapy.43,44
From early adolescence onwards, along with growing independence, relationships de-centralise
from the core family to peers, friends and other social networks. Social comparison and being
part of the group become increasingly important. As a result, the AYA may feel embarrassed
about their allergy and/or asthma due to fear of being perceived as different from their peers. To
prevent this, it may be recommended to encourage AYA to let their friends know about their
allergy and/or asthma and how they can help in an emergency (Grade C).29,31,32,45,59 Friends may
be invited to clinic appointments or practical workshops where they can be provided with hands-
on training in symptom recognition, the use of adrenaline auto-injectors and other aspects of
emergency management of allergy and asthma.29,31,32,45,59
Promoting allergy and/or asthma awareness (e.g. triggers and treatment) among peers/ co-
workers and teachers/ managers to support the AYA patient with self-management may be
recommended (Grade C).33,45,61,62,90 Information about the nature of the allergic conditions,
possible triggers and correct treatment may change their self-perception, and the perceptions of
others, and enable improvement in self-management. Increased awareness may also help reduce
allergy- and/or asthma-related bullying in schools and online.45,62,90
Teenagers like to use applications on their mobile phones and look for information on the
internet; moreover patients have reported finding online support networks
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
helpful.29,31,33,38,44,45,58-63,87,88 Signposting AYA to high quality reliable online resources about
allergy and/or asthma (eg websites, moderated forums) where they can obtain age-appropriate
information and advice may be recommended (Grade C).
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
Table 5. Support recommendations for adolescents and young adults with allergy and/or asthma
Enrolling the family in assisting the AYA to take on the self-management of their allergy and asthma may be recommended (Grade C, Evidence level IV)
Strength of recommendation: Moderate recommendation based Other considerations: Support the family to slowly empower the AYA to References: Bruzzese89,
on low to moderate risk of bias in qualitative 33,35,44,53,88 and take on more self-management as appropriate to the individual Bruzzese43, Holley33,
observational studies38,43,58,86,87,89. balancing autonomy and safety. Reducing control may be a challenge for Koster38, Mammen53,
some parents. Naimi35, Rhee86, Rhee87,
These included AYA with both asthma33,35,38,43,44,53,86,87,89 and
Steensgaard58,
food allergy58,88. Ask the AYA how they would like their parents/carers to be involved
Stewart88, Wamboldt44.
throughout their transition and help them develop confidence in
working with the adult’s services18. Give AYA the chance to raise any
concerns and queries separately from their parents/ carers respecting
their confidentiality and autonomy. This may take more clinic time.
Adherence may be improved if the family’s routines are modified to
assist AYA self-management activities43,44.
Encouraging AYA to let their friends know about their allergy and asthma and how to manage emergencies may be recommended (Grade C, Evidence level IV)
Strength of recommendation: Moderate recommendation based Other considerations: Some AYA may find this difficult, they may require References: Gallagher59,
on low to moderate risk of bias in qualitative32,59 and support and be encouraged to initially just talk to a few close friends. Jones29, Jones31,
observational studies29,31,45.These included AYA with asthma32, MacAdam32, Warren45.
Provide practical training in symptom’s recognition, the use of
anaphylaxis59 and food allergy29,31,45.
adrenaline autoinjectors and other aspects of emergency management
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
for friends.
Some AYA may want to bring a friend to the clinic for support.
Promoting allergy and asthma awareness (e.g. triggers and treatment) among peers/ co-workers and teachers/ managers to support the AYA patient with self-
management may be recommended (Grade C, Evidence level IV)
Strength of recommendation: Moderate recommendation as Other considerations: Efforts should be made to reduce asthma and References: Fong90,
based on low risk of bias in qualitative33,61 and one observational allergy related bullying especially in schools45,62,90 and online62. Gibson-Young62,
study45.These included AYAs with both asthma33 and food Holley33, Monks61,
allergy45,61. Warren45.
Signposting AYA to high quality online resources about allergy and asthma (websites, moderated forums) where they can obtain age-appropriate information and
advice may be recommended (Grade C, Evidence level IV)
Strength of recommendation: Moderate recommendation based Other considerations: Patients consider online supportive networks to be References: Bruzzese43,
on low to moderate risk of bias qualitative33,44,59-61 and helpful. Gallagher59, Gibson-
observational studies29,31,38,45,58,62,63,87,88,91. Young62, Hullmann63,
Peer support groups may be helpful, for example, voluntary- and
Holley33, Jones29,
These included AYA with asthma33,38,44,60,62,87,88, anaphylaxis59, community-sector organisations, such as condition specific support
Jones31, Jonsson60,
allergy91 and food allergy29,31,45,58,61,63. groups or charities13,18. Social networks via virtual platforms or electronic
Koster38, Monks61,
communication may be helpful13,18. Moderation of the group is desirable
Rhee87, Stewart88,
to ensure that interactions within the group are positive.
Steensgaard58, Suorsa91,
Warren45 Wombald44.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
AYA, adolescents and young adults.
DISCUSSION, GAPS IN THE EVIDENCE AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
Discussion
The EAACI Task Force on Adolescents and Young Adults has developed an evidence-based,
clinical practice guideline to help HCP to manage AYA with allergy and/or asthma. Adolescence
can be a critical time for AYA as they need to become independent, expert adult patients,
successfully self-managing their chronic conditions. This can be seen as a challenge but also as an
opportunity for HCP. This is because neurodevelopmentally, adolescents are naturally eager to
become more autonomous and are able to learn new skills quickly and easily.
The guideline sets out a series of general recommendations focused on how to run a clinical
service for AYA. Key recommendations are to consider starting transition early (11-13 years),
using a structured, multidisciplinary approach (involving both paediatric and adult clinics where
applicable); ensuring AYA fully understand their condition(s) and have resources that they can
access; discussing any implications for self-management in real-world contexts such as further
education/work and actively monitoring adherence. Specific allergy and/or asthma transition
recommendations are categorised according to improving adherence, optimising self-
management, addressing psychological issues and obtaining support. Highlights include
simplifying medication regimes and the use of reminders; focusing on areas where AYA are less
confident; involving peers in training AYA patients; identifying and managing psychological and
socioeconomic issues impacting disease control and quality of life; enrolling the family in
assisting AYA to take on self-management and encouraging AYA to let their friends know about
their allergy and asthma.
Limitations
Based on the recent survey, we know that there is a lack of adult allergy services, as well as
availability of HCP with a specific expertise (psychologists and dieticians) in many European
countries2. There is a need for an individualized and coordinated transition process between the
AYA, family and medical services to ensure the best outcomes. This needs to be multidisciplinary
including medical, nursing, dietetic, psychology and other staff. It is important to note that most
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
of the evidence about transition, challenges and interventions in AYA with allergy and/or asthma
comes from cross-sectional and qualitative studies. While many of these studies are high quality
with low risk of bias, they do not represent a robust form of evidence.
How to implement transition (Box 3)
Transition needs to be implemented as a joint approach from paediatric and adult services. The
process is simpler where the allergy service caters for all age groups but a separate AYA
transition clinic is still helpful to facilitate a smooth transition care process which addresses the
age and developmental specific needs for AYA, that has been shown to be successful in different
diseases92-95. As most HCP have received only minimal specific training on how to manage this
age group, this is likely to require additional staff training in delivering developmentally
appropriate healthcare (Table 6). Information technology may be helpful in implementing
additional support for this AYA group96. Some of the likely barriers and strategies facilitated to
delivering a transition service for AYA are detailed in Table 7. The task force is now working on
practical tools for assisting healthcare professionals to implement transition for allergy and
asthma.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
Box 3. Practical considerations to delivering an adolescent and young adult allergy
and/or asthma clinic
 Ensure that the AYA service is a joint activity between paediatric and adult services
 Use an adolescent and young adult- centred approach
 See AYA on their own for part of the clinic
 Ensure that the AYA is an active participant in the consultation
 Talk through barriers to self-management with the AYA and help them to come up with solutions, e.g.
alarms on mobile phone to remind them to take medication
 Education directed at AYA (and their peers) rather than their parents/carers
 Enroll parents and rest of family to support AYA to take on self-management of their allergy and asthma
 Encourage AYA to let their friends know about their allergy and asthma
 Utilize peer support groups
 Role play managing an allergic reaction or asthma attack
 Practice with dummy adrenaline autoinjector / asthma inhaler
 Use a personalized written management plan – AYA may find it easier to keep it as a photo on their
mobile phone
Selection of helpful resources:
 Centre for Health Care Transition Improvement. Got transition program. 2014. Available at:
https://www.gottransition.org/resources/index.cfm (last accessed 4th April 2020).
 ON TRAC (Transitioning Responsibly to Adult Care). Available at: http://ontracbc.ca/ (last accessed 4th
April 2020).
 Good 2 Go Transition Program. Available at: http://www.sickkids.ca/patient-family-resources/resource-
navigation-service/transitioning-to-adult-care/index.html (last accessed 4th April 2020).
 Checklist for readiness: http://www.sickkids.ca/PDFs/good2go/41196-
Patient%20readiness%20checklist.pdf (last accessed 4th April 2020).
 Nagra A, McGinnity PM, Davis N, et al. Implementing transition: Ready Steady Go. Archives of Disease in
Childhood - Education and Practice 2015;100:313-320.
 Children & Young People’s Allergy Network Scotland Young People’s. 2019. Transition Pathway to
Independent Self-Management of Allergies. Available from: https://www.cyans.scot.nhs.uk/wp-
content/uploads/2019/10/Transition-allergy-pathway-v1.1.pdf?x54518 (last accessed 4th April 2020).
 UK NHS toolkit: https://www.northumbria.nhs.uk/quality-and-safety/clinical-trials/for-healthcare-
professionals/ (last accessed 4th April 2020).
 AYA app: https://www.yphsig.org.uk/resources-1 (last accessed 4th April 2020).UK NHS toolkit:
https://www.northumbria.nhs.uk/quality-and-safety/clinical-trials/for-healthcare-professionals/ (last
accessed 4th April 2020).
 AYA app: https://www.yphsig.org.uk/resources-1 (last accessed 4th April 2020).
Other useful resources are available from local allergy and asthma organisations.
Recommendations for policy and training
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
This guideline has important implications for policy makers, managers and commissioners of
both paediatric- and adult-centred care in allergy and/or asthma patients. The recommendations
could be implemented at a patient, family and society level, through education, training,
resources and service delivery design.97 Based on the recent survey, HCP find managing AYA to
be a challenge2. Therefore, it would be helpful to implement training in the generic transition
process in undergraduate and postgraduate training programmes (Table 7). Commissioners need
to focus on and understand the important components of integrated AYA care that can be shown
to improve outcomes.98 Self-management is a core component of transition. It is associated with
cost savings, a more sustainable health system with less utilisation of health services and
subsequent easing of workforce pressures99. Promoting self-management is in line with
international health policy aims which support a ‘life course approach and people
empowerment’.100
Gaps in the evidence
Our systematic review summarizes the sizable amount of evidence for the challenges
experienced by AYA with allergy/or and asthma7. Specific gaps are notable in food allergy,
particularly around adherence to dietary restrictions, label reading and cooking skills in AYA. The
evidence gaps are predominately in relation to intervention strategies for allergy as the
systematic review only found interventional asthma studies8. Evidence is urgently needed to help
determine the best format for an AYA transition clinic and for the most effective and cost-
effective interventional strategies for allergy and asthma (Table 8).
Conclusions
The EAACI Task Force on Adolescents and Young Adults presents recommendations to support
the development of a transition clinic for adolescents and young adults with allergy and/or
asthma. This should support HCP to help AYA develop into competent and confident adult
patients who can successfully self-manage their allergy and/or asthma. Special emphasis is
placed on the difference between transition and transfer. Transitional care is required even
when AYA are managed in an allergy clinic dealing with all age groups. While it is possible to
make evidence-based recommendations, the evidence for some is minimal. Larger, well
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
designed, randomised controlled trials are required in this area. If optimal care is delivered for
AYA, they should become expert adult patients with the knowledge and skills to manage their
allergy and/or asthma throughout their lives.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
Table 6. Training requirements for HCP working with AYA with allergy and asthma
Knowledge Skills
 An understanding of AYA development including physical, psychological,  Skills and knowledge to address emotional, mental health and social issues
cognitive and emotional aspects
 Skills to assess adherence and assist AYA to improve this
 An understanding of the lifestyle of AYA such as education, vocation,
 Skills and knowledge to recognise and deliver behavioural change for common
employment, work, sports, recreation and future vision
risk-taking behaviours in the adolescence and young adulthood
 An understanding of AYA relationships both inside and outside the family
 Communication skills (with parents/carers and AYA), promotion of self-
 A knowledge of allergic diseases and asthma management in adolescence management and shared decision making
and young adulthood
AYA: adolescents and young adults. HCP, Healthcare professional.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
Table 7. Implementation: barriers, facilitators, audit criteria and resource implications
Recommendation areas Barriers to Facilitators to implementation Audit criteria Resource implications
implementation
Implementation of a structured, Organization challenges Training for staff, checklist of Existence of a 11- Some initial investment may be
multidisciplinary transition programme involving reorganising service to skills and knowledge for AYA 25 year transition required to reorganise the clinical
paediatric and adult HCP for 11-25 year age deliver a paediatric/ adult patients, regular meetings clinic. service.
group clinic. between adult and paediatric
teams, audit process.
Medication reminders, mobile applications and Convincing families to The use of alarm functions on Adherence to Simple changes to routines to
web-based applications, monitors or routines to change their routines. devices such as mobile therapy. facilitate adherence or the use of
improve adherence, symptom control and Expense of information phones. alarm functions on devises such as
quality of life technology applications mobile phones are inexpensive.
or monitors. Separate mobile or web-based
applications would be expensive.
Focusing consultation on areas where AYA say Changing HCP approach Training for HCP so they Survey of AYA Resources for training HCP.
they are not confident to improve self- which focuses on a set understand the mind set of patients to assess
management including adherence approach to history AYA and behavioural change their confidence in
taking in clinic. approaches. self-management.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
Formulation of a personal action plan with the Time to develop patient Generic personal action plans Possession of Time to develop patient specific self-
AYA and their family to enable them to self- specific self-management that can be personalised to the personal action management plans.
manage their allergy and asthma plans. needs of specific patients. plan by individual
patients.
Peer-led interventions to improve asthma Resistance and expense Education of HCP about the Asthma related Expense of involving peers in training
related quality of life, asthma knowledge and to of involving peers in benefit of peer-led quality of life and AYA.
reduce asthma related doctor visits and school training AYA. Availability interventions. control after peer-
absence of peers who have the led interventions.
same condition.
Supporting the AYA, family and the wider Resistance from teachers, Education of teachers, sport Access to social Costs associated with training and
community to allow the AYA inclusion in social sport club leader and club leader and others in the events by patients education.
events others in the community. community as to how to safely with allergy and
manage the risks associated asthma.
with allergy and asthma.
Motivational interviewing to improved asthma Lack of time and Training for HCP and Asthma related Expense of training and increased
symptoms and quality of life expertise. knowledge about how quality of life and clinic time, initially.
improved self-management control after use of
can reduce further healthcare motivational
utilisation. interviewing.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
Identification and management of psychological Lack of time in clinic to Training in AYA care and Survey of Cost of additional clinic time. Access
and socioeconomic issues impacting disease identify and assist in awareness of importance of psychological and to a psychologist within the allergy
control and health related quality of life managing these. psychological and socioeconomic service.
socioeconomic issues. issues.
Psychological interventions using a cognitive Lack of time and Training for HCP and Health related Expense of training and increased
behavioural therapy based or multi-systemic expertise. knowledge about how quality of life and clinic time, initially. Access to a
therapy approach to improve adherence, improved self-management symptom control psychologist within the allergy
asthma knowledge, self-management and can reduce further healthcare after use of these service.
symptom control utilisation. psychological
interventions.
Enrolling the family in assisting the AYA to take Inflexible family routines Involvement of families in Health related Cost of possible additional clinic
on the self-management of their allergy and and lack of time. clinic and explanation of quality of life and time.
asthma benefits of their support. symptom control
after use of these
psychological
interventions.
Encouraging AYA to let their friends know about AYA embarrassment and Explanation that friends will be Survey of the Cost of possible additional clinic
their asthma and allergy and how to manage concern that they will be interested in helping them. involvement in time. Plus resources directed at
emergencies seen as different. friends in friends.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
supporting self-
management.
Signposting AYA to high quality online resources Information on websites High quality websites or Survey the use of Costs associated with developing and
about allergy and asthma where they can obtain or from forums that moderated forums that can website and maintaining websites and
age-appropriate information and advice may be provided an inaccurate inform and support AYA with moderated forum. moderated forums.
recommended picture of allergy and allergy and asthma.
asthma.
AYA: adolescent and young adult. HCP: healthcare professionals.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
Table 8. Research gaps in the transition management of adolescent and young adults with allergy and asthma
Research gap Plan to address Priority
Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of different transition formats for allergy and asthma – should Cluster randomised controlled studies focused on different High
include patient and parent perspectives with quantitative and qualitative outcomes clinic formats with a process evaluation to assess which
components are most important
Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of educational interventions for AYA with allergy and asthma Randomised controlled trials with a process evaluation to High
assess which components are most important
Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of motivational interviewing for allergy and asthma Randomised controlled trials High
Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of psychological interventions (eg CBT) for allergy and asthma Randomised controlled trials High
Smart phone applications or other information technology interventions to improve self- Large randomised controlled trials as follow on from current High
management in AYAs with allergy and asthma small pilot studies38
The best time for the transfer of responsibilities of care for each facet to management Cross sectional studies looking at competence to deliver Medium
each facet of management at different ages
Development and validation of disease-related knowledge/ transition readiness tools for AYA with Projects using standard questionnaire development and Medium
allergy and asthma validation principles
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
Most effective way of training HCP in AYA management Randomised controlled trials of different training modalities Medium
with a process evaluation to assess which components are
most important
Value of personal actions plans for AYA to improve outcomes in allergy Randomised controlled trials Medium
Value of patient activation measures in allergy and asthma Randomised controlled trials Medium
Role of the identification and management of psychological and socioeconomic issues in AYA to Randomised controlled trials with a process evaluation to Low
improve health related quality of life and disease control assess which components are most important
Strategies to successfully enrol AYA friends to support self-management Qualitative studies to develop an intervention with small Low
follow on pilot study
AYA: adolescents and young adults. CBT: cognitive behavioural therapy. HCP: healthcare professionals.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The EAACI Adolescent and Young Adult Task Force would like to thank Paula Sands for her advice
with the literature search; Paula Fernandez for generating the logo; Marina Atanaskovic-
Markovic, Barbara Ballmer-Weber, Knut Brockow, Helen Brough, Adam Fox, Karin Hoffmann-
Sommergruber, Chrissie Jones, Antti Lauerma, Liam O'Mahony, Donald Payne, Joaquin Sastre,
Jurgen Schwarze, Terry Segal, Isabel Skypala, Gunter Sturm, Ingrid Terreehorst, Maria Jose Torres
and Eva-Maria Varga for their constructive, expert review of the draft guidelines; Susanne
Halken, Mary Jane Marchisotto, Glenis Scadding and Emilia Vassilopoulouon for reviewing the
guideline on behalf of EAACI Guidelines Committee; the EAACI Methodology Committee for their
expert feedback; all the EAACI members who commented on the draft guideline via the public
web site; Ana Antunes for her assistance and EAACI for funding the generation of the guideline.
We would like to thank Millie Basu, Lea Blum, Anna Borushko, Davide Caimmi, Antoine
Deschildre, Amandine Divaret-Chauveau, Anastasiya Kolotilina, Sarah Lyons, Sonia Martin-
Pereda, Maura Pedrini and Lea Tammen, for assisting in generating different language versions of
the adolescent and parent survey. We would like to thanks the following for distributing the
survey: Federasma e Allergie Onlus; Associazione Respiriamo Insieme; Associazione Laziale Asma
e Malattie Allergiche (ALAMA); Associazione Liguri Allergici (ALA); Associazione Asma Sardegna
Onlus; Cibo Amico Associazione per le Allergie Alimentari e l'Anafilassi; Associazione Nazionale
Dermatite Atopica (ANDeA); Associazione Food Allergy Italia; APS Chiara Ribechini; Uniamo
Federazione Italiana Malattie Rare onlus, Ari-aaa3 ONLUS; Società Italiana di Allergologia e
Immunologia Pediatrica (SIAIP); Società Italiana di Allergologia; Asma e Immunologia Clinica
(SIAAIC); Montserrat Alvaro, Jaime Lozano, Joan Bartra, Fundación Humans, Fundación Lovexair,
Edryx Healthcare; patients and parents from the pediatric allergy unit of the University Hospital
Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona; patients and parents from Centre Mèdic del Berguedà and Gabinet
Mèdic del Berguedà, Berga, Barcelona; Institut Vescomtat de Cabrera, Hostalric; Institut Blanca
d’Anjou, El Perelló; Societat Catalana d’Al·lergologia i Immunologia Clínica (SCAIC); Sociedad
Española de Inmunología Clínica y Alergología Pediátricas (SEICAP); Sociedad Española de
Alergología e Inmunología Clínica (SEAIC); Lara Pimenta; Mário Morais Almeida; Andre Moreira
(EAACI SPC Chair), Portuguese Association of Asthmatics; Deutscher Allergie- und Asthmabund
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
(DAAD) (Sabine Schnadt), Mönchengladbach, Germany; Daniel Munblit; Maria Kardakova;
‘Аллергомамы’, ‘АтД по-доказательному’ (Anna Taranova); Danish patient organization;
Asthma Allergy Denmark; Nederlands Anafylaxis Netwerk; Allergy UK (Carla Jones); Anaphylaxis
Campaign (Lynne Regent); Hilary Allen; Aideen Byrne; John Fitzsimons; Antoine Deschildre;
Amandine Divaret-Chauveau; “Association Asthme et Allergies” (Christine Rolland); “AFPRAL”
(Pascale Couratier); Elena Bradatan; Virginie Doyen; and Swiss patient organization. Finally we
would like to thank all the patients and parents who completed the survey. The systematic
review of the generic adolescent and young adult data were undertaken by Ekaterina Khaleva as
part of her Allergy MSc (University of Southampton).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Guideline concept and design: G.R., M.V-O., KK. Acquisition of data including search, all authors.
Analysis and interpretation of data, all authors. Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content, all authors. Obtained funding, G.R., M.V-O.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
GR and RK report research funding from Asthma UK and National Institutes of Health Research
into the challenge associated with asthma during adolescents. FT reports being a parent of a
young adult with food allergy. None of the other authors have anything to disclose.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
References
1. Blakemore SJ. Inventing ourselves: The secret life of the teenage brain. Hachette UK; 2018 May
15.
2. Khaleva E, Vazquez-Ortiz M, Comberiati P, DunnGalvin A, Pite H, Blumchen K, et al. Current
transition management of adolescents and young adults with allergy and asthma: A European
survey. Clinical Transl Allergy, in press.
3. Casey BJ, Jones RM, Hare TA. The adolescent brain. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2008;1124:111-126.
4. Buhle JT, Silvers JA, Wager TD, et al. Cognitive reappraisal of emotion: a meta-analysis of human
neuroimaging studies. Cereb Cortex. 2014;24(11):2981-2990.
5. Casey BJ, Galvan A, Somerville LH. Beyond simple models of adolescence to an integrated circuit-
based account: A commentary. Dev Cogn Neurosci. 2016;17:128-130.
6. Reyna VF, Farley F. Risk and Rationality in Adolescent Decision Making: Implications for Theory,
Practice, and Public Policy. Psychol Sci Public Interest. 2006;7(1):1-44.
7. Vazquez-Ortiz M, Angier E, Blumchen K, Comberiati P, Duca B, DunnGalvin A, et al. Understanding
the challenges faced by adolescents and young adults with allergic conditions: a systematic
review. Allergy, in press. [ALL-2019-01054.R1]
8. Knibb RC, Alviani C, Garriga-Baraut T, Mortz CG, Vazquez-Ortiz M, Angier E, et al. The
effectiveness of interventions to improve self-management for adolescents and young adults with
allergic conditions: a systematic review. Allergy, in press. [ALL-2019-01053.R1]
9. Brouwers MC, Kho ME, Browman GP, et al. AGREE II: advancing guideline development, reporting
and evaluation in health care. CMAJ. 2010;182(18):E839-842.
10. Collaboration A. Development and validation of an international appraisal instrument for
assessing the quality of clinical practice guidelines: the AGREE project. Qual Saf Health Care.
2003;12(1):18-23.
11. Oxford Centre for Evidence-based Medicine. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation.
2013. http://www.cebm.net/oxford-centre-evidence-based-medicine-levels-evidence-march-
2009/ (last accessed 27 July 2017).
12. Calvo I, Anton J, Bustabad S, et al. Consensus of the Spanish society of pediatric rheumatology for
transition management from pediatric to adult care in rheumatic patients with childhood onset.
Rheumatol Int. 2015;35(10):1615-1624.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
13. Foster HE, Minden K, Clemente D, et al. EULAR/PReS standards and recommendations for the
transitional care of young people with juvenile-onset rheumatic diseases. Ann Rheum Dis.
2017;76(4):639-646.
14. Ludvigsson JF, Agreus L, Ciacci C, et al. Transition from childhood to adulthood in coeliac disease:
the Prague consensus report. Gut. 2016;65(8):1242-1251.
15. Brooks AJ, Smith PJ, Cohen R, et al. UK guideline on transition of adolescent and young persons
with chronic digestive diseases from paediatric to adult care. Gut. 2017;66(6):988-1000.
16. Italian Society of Paediatric Gastroenterology H, Nutrition IAoHG, Endoscopists ISoEISoG, et al.
Transition of gastroenterological patients from paediatric to adult care: A position statement by
the Italian Societies of Gastroenterology. Dig Liver Dis. 2015;47(9):734-740.
17. Vajro P, Fischler B, Burra P, et al. The Health Care Transition of Youth With Liver Disease Into the
Adult Health System: Position Paper From ESPGHAN and EASL. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr.
2018;66(6):976-990.
18. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. 2015. Transition from children’s to adults’
services for young people using health or social care services social care services. Available from:
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng43 (Accessed on 1st September 2019).
19. Canadian Association of Paediatric Health Centres. A Guideline for Transition From Paediatric to
Adult Health Care for Youth with Special Health Care Needs: A National Approach. 2016 Avaliable
from:
https://ken.childrenshealthcarecanada.ca/xwiki/bin/view/Transitioning+from+Paediatric+to+Adul
t+Care/A+Guideline+for+Transition+from+Paediatric+to+Adult+Care (accessed 30th of August
2019).
20. Sawicki GS, Lukens-Bull K, Yin X, et al. Measuring the transition readiness of youth with special
healthcare needs: validation of the TRAQ--Transition Readiness Assessment Questionnaire. J
Pediatr Psychol. 2011;36(2):160-171.
21. Nagra A, McGinnity PM, Davis N, Salmon AP. Implementing transition: Ready Steady Go. Arch Dis
Child Educ Pract Ed. 2015;100(6):313-320.
22. Ferris ME, Harward DH, Bickford K, et al. A clinical tool to measure the components of health-care
transition from pediatric care to adult care: the UNC TR(x)ANSITION scale. Ren Fail.
2012;34(6):744-753.
23. Gurvitz M, Valente AM, Broberg C, et al. Prevalence and predictors of gaps in care among adult
congenital heart disease patients: HEART-ACHD (The Health, Education, and Access Research
Trial). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61(21):2180-2184.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
24. Heery E, Sheehan AM, While AE, Coyne I. Experiences and Outcomes of Transition from Pediatric
to Adult Health Care Services for Young People with Congenital Heart Disease: A Systematic
Review. Congenit Heart Dis. 2015;10(5):413-427.
25. Young NL, Barden WS, Mills WA, Burke TA, Law M, Boydell K. Transition to adult-oriented health
care: perspectives of youth and adults with complex physical disabilities. Phys Occup Ther Pediatr.
2009;29(4):345-361.
26. Cohen E, Mackenzie RG, Yates GL. HEADSS, a psychosocial risk assessment instrument:
implications for designing effective intervention programs for runaway youth. The Journal of
adolescent health : official publication of the Society for Adolescent Medicine. 1991;12(7):539-544.
27. Axelsson M, Emilsson M, Brink E, Lundgren J, Toren K, Lotvall J. Personality, adherence, asthma
control and health-related quality of life in young adult asthmatics. Respiratory Medicine.
2009;103(7):1033-1040.
28. Rhee H, Wicks MN, Dolgoff JS, Love TM, Harrington D. Cognitive factors predict medication
adherence and asthma control in urban adolescents with asthma. Patient preference &
adherence. 2018;12:929-937.
29. Jones CJ, Smith HE, Frew AJ, Toit GD, Mukhopadhyay S, Llewellyn CD. Explaining adherence to
self-care behaviours amongst adolescents with food allergy: a comparison of the health belief
model and the common sense self-regulation model. British Journal of Health Psychology.
2014;19(1):65-82.
30. Saleh-Langenberg J, Flokstra-de Blok BM, Goossens NJ, Kemna JC, van der Velde JL, Dubois AE.
The compliance and burden of treatment with the epinephrine auto-injector in food-allergic
adolescents. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2016;27(1):28-34.
31. Jones CJ, Llewellyn CD, Frew AJ, Du Toit G, Mukhopadhyay S, Smith H. Factors associated with
good adherence to self-care behaviours amongst adolescents with food allergy. Pediatr Allergy
Immunol. 2015;26(2):111-118.
32. MacAdam C, Barnett J, Roberts G, et al. What factors affect the carriage of epinephrine auto-
injectors by teenagers? Clinical and Translational Allergy. 2012;2(1).
33. Holley S, Walker D, Knibb R, et al. Barriers and facilitators to self-management of asthma in
adolescents: An interview study to inform development of a novel intervention. Clinical &
Experimental Allergy. 2018;48(8):944-956.
34. Jonsson M, Bergstrom A, Egmar AC, Hedlin G, Lind T, Kull I. Asthma during adolescence impairs
health-related quality of life. The Journal of Allergy & Clinical Immunology in Practice.
2016;4(1):144-146.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
35. Naimi DR, Freedman TG, Ginsburg KR, et al. Adolescents and asthma: why bother with our meds?
Journal of Allergy & Clinical Immunology. 2009;123(6):1335-1341.
36. Blaakman SW, Cohen A, Fagnano M, Halterman JS. Asthma medication adherence among urban
teens: a qualitative analysis of barriers, facilitators and experiences with school-based care.
Journal of Asthma. 2014;51(5):522-529.
37. Sleath B, Carpenter DM, Walsh KE, et al. Factors associated with adolescent and caregiver
reported problems in using asthma medications. Journal of Asthma. 2018:1-7.
38. Koster ES, Philbert D, Winters NA, Bouvy ML. Adolescents' inhaled corticosteroid adherence: the
importance of treatment perceptions and medication knowledge. Journal of Asthma.
2015;52(4):431-436.
39. Ellis DA, King P, Naar-King S. Mediators of Treatment Effects in a Randomized Clinical Trial of
Multisystemic Therapy-Health Care in Adolescents With Poorly Controlled Asthma: Disease
Knowledge and Device Use Skills. J Pediatr Psychol. 2016;41(5):522-530.
40. Bruzzese JM, Unikel L, Gallagher R, Evans D, Colland V. Feasibility and impact of a school-based
intervention for families of urban adolescents with asthma: results from a randomized pilot trial.
Fam Process. 2008;47(1):95-113.
41. Naar S, Ellis D, Cunningham P, et al. Comprehensive Community-Based Intervention and Asthma
Outcomes in African American Adolescents. Pediatrics. 2018;142(4).
42. Naar-King S, Ellis D, King PS, et al. Multisystemic therapy for high-risk African American
adolescents with asthma: a randomized clinical trial. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2014;82(3):536-545.
43. Bruzzese JM, Idalski Carcone A, Lam P, Ellis DA, Naar-King S. Adherence to asthma medication
regimens in urban African American adolescents: application of self-determination theory. Health
Psychology. 2014;33(5):461-464.
44. Wamboldt FS, Bender BG, Rankin AE. Adolescent decision-making about use of inhaled asthma
controller medication: results from focus groups with participants from a prior longitudinal study.
J Asthma. 2011;48(7):741-750.
45. Warren CM, Dyer AA, Otto AK, et al. Food Allergy-Related Risk-Taking and Management Behaviors
Among Adolescents and Young Adults. The Journal of Allergy & Clinical Immunology in Practice.
2017;5(2):381-390.e313.
46. Perry TT, Marshall A, Berlinski A, et al. Smartphone-based vs paper-based asthma action plans for
adolescents. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2017;118(3):298-303.
47. Al-sheyab N, Gallagher R, Crisp J, Shah S. Peer-led education for adolescents with asthma in
Jordan: a cluster-randomized controlled trial. Pediatrics. 2012;129(1):e106-112.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
48. Gibson PG, Shah S, Mamoon HA. Peer-led asthma education for adolescents: impact evaluation.
The Journal of adolescent health : official publication of the Society for Adolescent Medicine.
1998;22(1):66-72.
49. Rhee H, Belyea MJ, Hunt JF, Brasch J. Effects of a peer-led asthma self-management program for
adolescents. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2011;165(6):513-519.
50. Rhee H, Pesis-Katz I, Xing J. Cost benefits of a peer-led asthma self-management program for
adolescents. J Asthma. 2012;49(6):606-613.
51. Shah S, Peat JK, Mazurski EJ, et al. Effect of peer led programme for asthma education in
adolescents: cluster randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2001;322(7286):583-585.
52. MacKenzie H, Roberts G, van Laar D, Dean T. Teenagers' experiences of living with food
hypersensitivity: a qualitative study. Pediatric Allergy & Immunology. 2010;21(4):595-602.
53. Mammen J, Rhee H, Norton SA, Butz AM, Halterman JS, Arcoleo K. An integrated operational
definition and conceptual model of asthma self-management in teens. Journal of Asthma. 2018.
54. Mammen JR, Rhee H, Norton SA, Butz AM. Perceptions and experiences underlying self-
management and reporting of symptoms in teens with asthma. Journal of Asthma.
2017;54(2):143-152.
55. Winn CON, Mackintosh KA, Eddolls WTB, et al. Perceptions of asthma and exercise in adolescents
with and without asthma. J Asthma. 2018;55(8):868-876.
56. Seid M, D'Amico EJ, Varni JW, et al. The in vivo adherence intervention for at risk adolescents with
asthma: report of a randomized pilot trial. J Pediatr Psychol. 2012;37(4):390-403.
57. Bruzzese JM, Fisher PH, Lemp N, Warner CM. Asthma and social anxiety in adolescents. J Pediatr.
2009;155(3):398-403.
58. Stensgaard A, Bindslev-Jensen C, Nielsen D, Munch M, DunnGalvin A. Quality of life in childhood,
adolescence and adult food allergy: Patient and parent perspectives. Clinical & Experimental
Allergy. 2017;47(4):530-539.
59. Gallagher M, Worth A, Cunningham-Burley S, Sheikh A. Strategies for living with the risk of
anaphylaxis in adolescence: qualitative study of young people and their parents. Primary Care
Respiratory Journal. 2012;21(4):392-397.
60. Jonsson M, Egmar AC, Hallner E, Kull I. Experiences of living with asthma - a focus group study
with adolescents and parents of children with asthma. Journal of Asthma. 2014;51(2):185-192.
61. Monks H, G, MH, et al. How do teenagers manage their food allergies? Clinical & Experimental
Allergy. 2010;40(10):1533-1540.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
62. Gibson-Young L, Martinasek MP, Clutter M, Forrest J. Are students with asthma at increased risk
for being a victim of bullying in school or cyberspace? Findings from the 2011 Florida youth risk
behavior survey. Journal of School Health. 2014;84(7):429-434.
63. Hullmann SE, Molzon ES, Eddington AR, Mullins LL. Dating Anxiety in Adolescents and Young
Adults With Food Allergies: A Comparison to Healthy Peers. Journal of Asthma and Allergy
Educators. 2012;3(4):172-177.
64. Ferro MA, Van Lieshout RJ, Scott JG, Alati R, Mamun AA, Dingle K. Condition-specific associations
of symptoms of depression and anxiety in adolescents and young adults with asthma and food
allergy. J Asthma. 2016;53(3):282-288.
65. Halvorsen JA, Lien L, Dalgard F, Bjertness E, Stern RS. Suicidal ideation, mental health problems,
and social function in adolescents with eczema: a population-based study. J Invest Dermatol.
2014;134(7):1847-1854.
66. Kim SH, Hur J, Jang JY, et al. Psychological Distress in Young Adult Males with Atopic Dermatitis: A
Cross-Sectional Study. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015;94(23):e949.
67. Lee S, Shin A. Association of atopic dermatitis with depressive symptoms and suicidal behaviors
among adolescents in Korea: the 2013 Korean Youth Risk Behavior Survey. BMC Psychiatry.
2017;17(1):3.
68. Lu Y, Ho R, Lim TK, et al. Psychiatric comorbidities in Asian adolescent asthma patients and the
contributions of neuroticism and perceived stress. The Journal of adolescent health : official
publication of the Society for Adolescent Medicine. 2014;55(2):267-275.
69. Noh HM, Cho JJ, Park YS, Kim JH. The relationship between suicidal behaviors and atopic
dermatitis in Korean adolescents. J Health Psychol. 2016;21(10):2183-2194.
70. Polloni L, Ferruzza E, Ronconi L, et al. Mental health and behavior of food-allergic adolescents
compared to a healthy matched sample. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2015;115(2):158-160.
71. Shankar M, Fagnano M, Blaakman SW, Rhee H, Halterman JS. Depressive Symptoms Among
Urban Adolescents with Asthma: A Focus for Providers. Academic pediatrics. 2018;20:20.
72. Bruzzese JM, Kingston S, Zhao Y, DiMeglio JS, Cespedes A, George M. Psychological Factors
Influencing the Decision of Urban Adolescents With Undiagnosed Asthma to Obtain Medical Care.
Journal of Adolescent Health. 2016;59(5):543-548.
73. Bruzzese JM, Reigada LC, Lamm A, et al. Association of Youth and Caregiver Anxiety and Asthma
Care Among Urban Young Adolescents. Academic pediatrics. 2016;16(8):792-798.
74. Tiggelman D, van de Ven MO, van Schayck OC, Kleinjan M, Engels RC. The Common Sense Model
in early adolescents with asthma: longitudinal relations between illness perceptions, asthma
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
control and emotional problems mediated by coping. Journal of Psychosomatic Research.
2014;77(4):309-315.
75. Mielck A, Reitmeir P, Vogelmann M, Leidl R. Impact of educational level on health-related quality
of life (HRQL): results from Germany based on the EuroQol 5D (EQ-5D). Eur J Public Health.
2013;23(1):45-49.
76. Heyworth IT, Hazell ML, Linehan MF, Frank TL. How do common chronic conditions affect health-
related quality of life? Br J Gen Pract. 2009;59(568):e353-358.
77. Ballardini N, Ostblom E, Wahlgren CF, Kull I. Mild eczema affects self-perceived health among pre-
adolescent girls. Acta Dermato-Venereologica. 2014;94(3):312-316.
78. Braig S, B, t S, et al. Age-specific influence of wheezing phenotypes on pre-adolescent and
adolescent health-related quality of life. Pediatric Allergy & Immunology. 2014;25(8):781-787.
79. Sundell K, Bergstrom SE, Hedlin G, Ygge BM, Tunsater A. Quality of life in adolescents with
asthma, during the transition period from child to adult. The clinical respiratory journal.
2011;5(4):195-202.
80. Ng MS, Tan S, Chan NH, Foong AY, Koh MJ. Effect of atopic dermatitis on quality of life and its
psychosocial impact in Asian adolescents. Australas J Dermatol. 2018;59(2):e114-e117.
81. Stridsman C, Backman H, Eklund BM, Ronmark E, Hedman L. Adolescent girls with asthma have
worse asthma control and health-related quality of life than boys-A population based study.
Pediatr Pulmonol. 2017;52(7):866-872.
82. Hedman L, Stridsman C, Andersson M, Backman H, Jansson SA, Ronmark E. Population-based
study shows that teenage girls with asthma had impaired health-related quality of life. Acta
Paediatrica, International Journal of Paediatrics. 2017;106(7):1128-1135.
83. Amaral LM, Moratelli L, Palma PV, Leite IC. The quality of life of Brazilian adolescents with asthma:
associated clinical and sociodemographic factors. Journal of Asthma. 2014;51(6):660-666.
84. Thabrew H, Goodyear-Smith F. Youth version, Case-finding and Help Assessment Tool
(YouthCHAT): An electronic, psychosocial screener for young people with long-term physical
conditions. J Paediatr Child Health. 2020;56(1):102-106.
85. Thabrew H, Corter A, Goodyear-Smith F, Goldfinch M. Randomized Trial Comparing the Electronic
Composite Psychosocial Screener YouthCHAT With a Clinician-Interview Assessment for Young
People: A Study Protocol. JMIR Res Protoc. 2017;6(7):e135.
86. Rhee H, Belyea MJ, Ciurzynski S, Brasch J. Barriers to asthma self-management in adolescents:
Relationships to psychosocial factors. Pediatric Pulmonology. 2009;44(2):183-191.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
87. Rhee H, Belyea MJ, Brasch J. Family support and asthma outcomes in adolescents: barriers to
adherence as a mediator. Journal of Adolescent Health. 2010;47(5):472-478.
88. Stewart M, Letourneau N, Masuda JR, et al. Support needs and preferences of young adolescents
with asthma and allergies: "just no one really seems to understand". J Pediatr Nurs.
2012;27(5):479-490.
89. Bruzzese JM, Stepney C, Fiorino EK, et al. Asthma self-management is sub-optimal in urban
Hispanic and African American/black early adolescents with uncontrolled persistent asthma. J
Asthma. 2012;49(1):90-97.
90. Fong AT, Katelaris CH, Wainstein BK. Bullying in Australian children and adolescents with food
allergies. Pediatric Allergy & Immunology. 2018;29(7):740-746.
91. Suorsa KI, Cushing CC, Mullins AJ, et al. Adolescents and young adults with asthma and allergies:
Physical activity, self-efficacy, social support, and subsequent psychosocial outcomes. Children's
Health Care. 2016;45(4):414-427.
92. Geerlings RP, Aldenkamp AP, Gottmer-Welschen LM, et al. Evaluation of a multidisciplinary
epilepsy transition clinic for adolescents. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2016;20(3):385-392.
93. Levy-Shraga Y, Elisha N, Ben-Ami M, et al. Glycemic control and clinic attendance of emerging
adults with type 1 diabetes at a transition care clinic. Acta Diabetol. 2016;53(1):27-33.
94. Spaic T, Robinson T, Goldbloom E, et al. Closing the Gap: Results of the Multicenter Canadian
Randomized Controlled Trial of Structured Transition in Young Adults With Type 1 Diabetes.
Diabetes Care. 2019;42(6):1018-1026.
95. Twito O, Shatzman-Steuerman R, Dror N, Nabriski D, Eliakim A. The "combined team" transition
clinic model in endocrinology results in high adherence rates and patient satisfaction. J Pediatr
Endocrinol Metab. 2019;32(5):505-511.
96. Matricardi PM, Dramburg S, Alvarez-Perea A, Antolín-Amérigo D, Apfelbacher C, Atanaskovic-
Markovic M, Berger U, Blaiss MS, Blank S, Boni E, Bonini M. The role of mobile health technologies
in allergy care: An EAACI position paper. Allergy. 2019 Jun 22.
97. Crowley R, Wolfe I, Lock K, McKee M. Improving the transition between paediatric and adult
healthcare: a systematic review. Arch Dis Child. 2011;96(6):548-553.
98. Colver A, McConachie H, Le Couteur A, et al. A longitudinal, observational study of the features of
transitional healthcare associated with better outcomes for young people with long-term
conditions. BMC Med. 2018;16(1):111.
99. De Silva D. Evidence: helping people help themselves. The Health Foundation; 2011.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA
100. World Health Organization. Health 2020: a European policy framework supporting action across
government and society for health and well-being. Proceedings of Regional Committee for
Europe. 2012 Sep:10-3.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
elcitrA
detpeccA