PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
Abstract
The aim of this research was to explore the experiential knowledge of patient-facing staff
working in a prosthetic rehabilitation centre in the United Kingdom. Eleven members of staff
with varied roles and levels of experience took part in semi-structured interviews. Transcripts
were analyzed using thematic analysis. Six themes were identified: 1) defining successful
rehabilitation, 2) the complex reality of patient-centred care, 3) organizational and
interpersonal challenges, 4) who provides psychological support? 5) prosthetic as a panacea,
and 6) crash landing. These findings highlight the impact of rotational roles in an environment
reliant on experiential knowledge, the challenge of applying patient-centred care models, and
the negative effect of unrealistic beliefs about prosthetics on patients and staff. This study
contributes to a limited pool of literature articulating the experiential knowledge of staff in the
context of rehabilitation after major lower limb loss, facilitating the translation of practice-
based evidence into evidence-based practice.
1
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
In the United Kingdom, there are 35 National Health Service (NHS) Prosthetic and Amputee
Rehabilitation Centres that provide a service to those with limb deficiency from all causes
(Research and Disability Clinical Reference Group, n.d.). Approximately 65 per cent of
patients who experience major lower limb amputation (MLLA) will be referred to a
rehabilitation centre for consideration for a prosthesis (Robinson, Sansam, Hirst, & Neumann,
2010). The patient will begin prosthetic rehabilitation once the limb has been manufactured,
learning how to don and doff the limb, adjust the fit using prosthetic socks, and practicing
walking. Where patients are able to attend every day, rehabilitation usually lasts for five to six
weeks (St George’s University Hospitals, 2018). Despite this extensive contact between staff
and patients during the early months after MLLA, and the increasing profile of limb loss in
healthcare services, little attention has been paid to the experiential knowledge (i.e., knowledge
gained through direct encounter with a person, subject, or thing; Burnard, 2005) of staff
working in MLLA rehabilitation services. One exception, van Twillert, Geertzen, Hemminga,
Postema, and Lettinga (2012), explored the complexity of establishing evidence-based practice
in a prosthetic rehabilitation team. The authors reported that rehabilitation staff encounter a
variety of problems when they want to implement the results of scientific research into practice,
including lack of evidence, contradictory results, different classification systems, and diverging
stakeholder interests, all against a background of continuous technological changes.
At the time of writing, there is a lack of data as to what constitutes best practice in
MLLA rehabilitation (Cumming, Barr, & Howe, 2006). As a result, staff working in this
context rely heavily on their experiential knowledge to guide and inform practice. However,
van Twillert et al. (2012) noted that this experiential knowledge is rarely made explicit in
prosthetic rehabilitation. More research is needed that explores and articulates the experiential
knowledge held by rehabilitation staff to make this information suitable for sharing (e.g., with
other healthcare professionals and service providers) and, thus, for training and service
2
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
improvement (van Twillert et al., 2012). Making knowledge accessible in this way also permits
discussion of what constitutes relevant knowledge (as opposed to tradition or dogma) in this
field of practice. This study seeks to address this omission by exploring the rehabilitation
process from the perspective of those who work directly with patients throughout this journey.
The aim of this study is to explore the experiential knowledge of patient-facing staff
working in a variety of disciplines in a prosthetic rehabilitation centre in the United Kingdom.
Three broad questions will be explored: first, how do members of staff at an NHS MLLA
rehabilitation centre experience their roles? Second, what challenges do these individuals
encounter in their roles? Finally, what is their understanding of the primary challenges faced
by patients during the first year after MLLA? Through this final question, we aim to offer a
novel perspective of the recovery journey that complements extant reports from the patient
perspective (e.g., Gallagher & MacLachlan, 2001; Liu, Williams, Liu, & Chien, 2010; Norlyk,
Martinsen, & Kjaer-Petersen, 2013). It is hoped that by making explicit the experiential
knowledge of rehabilitation staff, this study will enable us to take a step towards the
transformation of practice-based evidence into evidence-based practice and, consequently,
service improvement.
Method
Context of the Research
This research took place at a UK-based NHS amputee rehabilitation centre. The
rehabilitation centre is located in a community hospital but operates as a relatively self-
contained unit comprising a medical clinic, rehabilitation gym, prosthetic workshop, and
consultation rooms. Patients attending the centre have undergone MLLA due to a variety of
causes including vascular conditions, trauma, infection, disease, or congenital defects. Patients
usually attend full-time for several weeks post-surgery, either on an inpatient or outpatient
basis, to learn to use a prosthetic limb. After discharge from the initial rehabilitation phase,
3
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
patients will continue to attend the centre periodically throughout their lifetimes for ongoing
health checks and prosthetic reviews.
It is also important to note that not every patient is suitable for prosthetic rehabilitation.
Walking with a prosthesis requires a considerable increase in energy expenditure over and
above ‘normal’ walking (approximately 30 per cent for transtibial and 70 per cent for
transfemoral amputation; Stewart & Trimmings, 2008). The average age of users of NHS
rehabilitation services post-amputation is 65, and many are suffering from secondary
conditions such as cardiovascular or cerebrovascular disease, diabetes, cancer, or other injuries
(Limbless Statistics, 2013). Therefore, many patients do not have the requisite strength and
fitness to safely operate a prosthesis and accommodate the additional energy demands (e.g.,
Robinson et al., 2010).
Sampling and Participants
Ethical approval was sought from and granted by the first author’s University Research
Ethics Committee, the NHS Research Ethics Committees, and the Health Research Authority.
A maximum-variation, criterion-based purposive sampling strategy (Sparkes & Smith, 2014)
was used in an attempt to represent the views of the multi-disciplinary team. To be eligible to
participate, all participants were required to be aged 18 years or over, not suffering from
cognitive impairment, and currently employed in a patient-facing role in the rehabilitation team
at the centre. Characteristics accounted for in the maximum variation sample were role type
and number of years spent working with MLLA patients. In the context of this research, those
in junior positions had less than three years’ experience and were in rotational positions,
remaining in role for only six to nine months. Those in senior roles had more than five years’
experience and were in static positions. A total of 11 members of staff were recruited and gave
informed consent to participate. All participants were female, as there were no male staff
working in the sampled groups at the time of study. As a result, this study lacks a male
4
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
perspective, which would be an interesting avenue for future research. The sample included
one clinical psychologist, one senior nurse specialist, one prosthetist, one team leader, two
occupational therapists and five physiotherapists. Two physiotherapists held rotational
positions, while the remaining nine participants were permanent members of staff. Length of
time spent working with individuals with limb loss varied from six months to 30 years, and
level of seniority varied from band five (first role as a graduate) to band eight (team lead).
Data Collection
Traditionally, medical research has been dominated by positivist methods such as
randomised clinical trials (e.g., Watts, 2011) and objective performance indicators such as
waiting times (Pope, van Royan, & Baker, 2002). However, as noted by Hagger and
Chatzisarantis (2011), “… adherence to a single theoretical or methodological approach is not
only dogmatic and, frequently, born of prejudice and lack of understanding, but also
detrimental to understanding and developing unique and new perspectives on behavioural
phenomena” (p. 275). Recommendations have been made to embrace qualitative research and
alternative paradigms in which knowledge is viewed as multiple, situated, and socially and
historically bounded (e.g., interpretivism). Such paradigms enable us to explore “the cultural
contexts of health – that is, the practices and behaviour that groups of people share and which
are defined by customs, language, and geography” (Greenhalgh, 2016, p. ii). The unique
contribution made by qualitative research in this respect is being increasingly recognised within
domains such as healthcare quality (e.g., Pope et al., 2002), evidence-based medicine (e.g.,
Green & Britten, 1998) barriers to change implementation (e.g., Grol, 1997) and the transition
from hospital to home (e.g., Hodson et al., 2016). This research was underpinned by
interpretivism; that is, ontological relativism (i.e., reality is multiple, created, and mind-
dependent) and epistemological constructivism (i.e., knowledge is constructed and subjective)
(Wadey & Day, 2018).
5
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
At the onset of data collection, the first author had spent five months embedded in the
research setting engaging in observation, interaction with staff and patients, and work as a
contracted volunteer for up to two days per week within the hospital (for reflections on this
period, see Sanders, Wadey, Day, & Winter, 2019). Each member of staff took part in a semi-
structured interview lasting between 28 and 87 minutes (average = 67 minutes). Semi-
structured interviews were used to enable and encourage participants to speak of their
experiences in their own way and through their own lens. This approach allows researcher and
participant to engage in a mutual dialogue, where the initial topics envisaged by the researcher
may be adjusted and restructured during the course of the interview in light of participant
responses (Smith & Osborn, 2008). All interviews took place in a meeting room at the
rehabilitation centre at a time of the participant’s choosing, and were audio recorded with
permission. The potential topics envisaged for this interview were developed directly from the
research questions of this study, and included: the individual’s career path to date, experiences
working at the rehabilitation centre and with MLLA patients, any challenges she had faced and
how she had dealt with them, and what she believed to be the primary challenges facing
individuals undergoing rehabilitation after MLLA. Participants were also given the opportunity
to discuss any experiences or topics that they considered relevant. After each interview, the
first author made a note of any initial thoughts or reflections in a reflexive journal, allowing
any unexpected or interesting concepts to be explored in more detail with subsequent
participants (Williams, Ma, & Martin Ginis, 2017).
Data Analysis
To provide the fullest possible understanding of the participants’ perceptions, inductive
thematic analysis was used to systematically identify, organise, and achieve insight into
patterns of meaning across the data set (Braun & Clarke, 2012). Through focusing on meaning
across a data set, thematic analysis allows the researcher to make sense of collective meanings
6
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
and experiences. To start, the first author transcribed each interview verbatim. Rather than a
simply mechanical act, the transcription process was an interpretative one enabling her to build
familiarization with the data and begin to create meanings (e.g., Lapadat & Lindsay, 1999).
This process was complemented by reading and re-reading the transcripts and making notes on
initial ideas about data content. The second stage of analysis involved generating codes to
identify and provide a label for potentially relevant features of the data. These codes were a
mix of descriptive and interpretative labels that acted as shorthand during latter stages of
analysis. The next stage involved sorting the different codes into potential themes. The first
author collated relevant coded data extracts under the identified themes, then reviewed the
themes in relation to the coded data, the entire data set, and the overall story they told about
the participants’ experiences. Finally, a report was produced that provides a concise, logical,
coherent, non-repetitive, and interesting account of the story the data told, both across and
within themes (Braun, Clarke, & Weate, 2016).
Research Quality and Rigor
Five practical strategies were used to evidence the credibility, rigor, generalisability,
and significance of this research. The first strategy was author self-reflexivity, achieved
through the first author’s use of a written journal to understand how she affected the data
collection and analysis process. The first author also presented her interpretations of the data
to the co-authors, who acted as ‘critical friends’ by exploring, debating, and reflecting upon
possible alternative interpretations of the data (Sparkes & Smith, 2014). To increase reflexivity
and enhance transparency, the research activities and decision-making processes were
documented in an audit trail (Cresswell & Miller, 2000), which was reviewed and interrogated
by the co-authors. In the pursuit of credibility, thick description (i.e., detailed participant
quotations) is provided in the results section to account for the specificity and circumstantiality
of the data, which may otherwise appear divorced from its context (Tracy, 2010). Thick
7
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
description also provides the reader with evidence to reflect upon and to make connections
with their own lives or the lives of others and may also enhance naturalistic generalisability
and transferability (Smith, 2017). Finally, the identified themes and proposed practical
implications were presented to a group comprising five participants interviewed during the
initial data collection, and three new members of staff, to gain a sense of generalisability
(Wadey & Day, 2018). Staff were invited to reflect on which themes (if any) resonated with
them, whether they recognised their own experiences in the data, and any other ideas they
might have to address the issues raised. Through this process of active reflection, staff reported
that the findings overlapped with their own experiences, and a space was created for the less
dominant voices and perspectives to be heard. For example, the presentation of findings that
challenged the views of the senior members of the group enabled junior staff to voice their
opinions and experiences, even where these diverged from those of their supervisors. This gave
a fuller picture of the dynamics between different groups of staff in the centre and elaborated
upon the practical implications presented.
Results
Defining Successful Rehabilitation
This theme explores how staff define successful rehabilitation and how this definition
differs between participants with different roles and experience. It also explores the ways in
which more experienced staff encourage patients to adopt a multidimensional and
individualised definition of successful rehabilitation. Staff believed that a key element of
successful rehabilitation involved making positive changes in the lives of their patients,
enabling them to move on from the trauma of MLLA. One senior member of staff explained,
“it’s very much a moving forward stage, so something horrible has happened to them [the
patients] but now, on the whole, they’re moving forwards.” Yet, while all the participants
derived satisfaction from enabling patients to move forward, their perspectives on what
8
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
constituted positive change evolved with experience. This was exemplified by junior
physiotherapists, who focused on the importance of visible progress, often comparing their
recent placements in other hospital services to the obvious progression they witnessed in
MLLA rehabilitation (i.e., the transition from sitting in a wheelchair to standing and walking).
One junior physiotherapist commented: “I like it here because the patient comes and there are
clear, objective progressions, whereas in neurological rehabilitation you’re looking for, I don’t
know, a flicker in their big toe or something.” However, senior staff and those in non-
physiotherapy roles, such as occupational therapists and clinical psychologists, also recognised
the risks of adopting and promoting a unidimensional definition of success focused solely on
walking. Instead, they embraced a holistic approach to successful rehabilitation that
emphasised ‘living well’ (i.e., the patient being able to do the things they want to do). This
shift in focus from walking to living well occurred gradually via a combination of first-hand
experience in their roles and supervision from more experienced staff. One senior member of
staff reflected on her own development across her career:
I remember being them [junior physios] and thinking, ‘We can treat everybody, we can
make a difference to everybody’, and it took me quite a long time to recognise that, or
to feel comfortable that, not always getting a patient to use a prosthesis wasn’t
necessarily a failure.
Senior staff also encouraged patients to engage with a multidimensional recovery
process that included taking responsibility for their health and adopting positive behaviors. One
senior practitioner described how she sought to equip patients with a broad understanding of
successful rehabilitation and encourage these healthy behaviours:
Can they [the patients] see the reasoning as to why they’ve had the operation done to
them in the first place? Am I ever going to get through to them that the fact that they
smoked 50 cigarettes a day for the last 40 years is possibly the reason why they’ve had
9
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
the amputation? Some patients, you’re never going to be able to get them to see, and I
guess that’s partly because perhaps they don’t want to see that they might have been
the cause of their amputation, and I understand that, but I always found it frustrating.
So, if somebody’s wound’s not healing but they’re still going out and smoking their
fags permanently and having a rubbish diet, well, I’ve not done my job either if I don’t
try and get them some help to try and tackle that. Admittedly, they have to want to be
able to do that, but I have to try.
This participant accepted this process relied on patients’ willingness to change, but more junior
members of staff described feeling demotivated and frustrated when their attempts at
encouraging behavior change seemed to have no effect on patients. These accounts suggest
that effecting long-term behavior change is more challenging than supporting patients’
functional progression. In some ways, it was more straightforward for staff to define successful
rehabilitation purely in the context of walking than to adopt a more holistic perspective on what
constitutes real success.
The Complex Reality of Patient-Centre Care
This theme explores the delivery of patient-centred care in an MLLA rehabilitation
context. In particular, this theme raises awareness of the difficulty of adopting this approach
with patients who have no prior understanding of the rehabilitation process, and the pressure it
places on junior staff with little experiential knowledge. The staff shared an understanding that
delivering patient-centred care involved fostering proactive problem-solving and self-
management in patients so they could direct their own recovery journeys. To this end, several
members of staff spoke of using goal-setting to encourage patients to individualise their
rehabilitation and shape their expectations of what they could realistically achieve. However,
staff were also aware that it was difficult for patients to set individualised goals when they had
10
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
no experience with the rehabilitation process. One senior practitioner described her approach
to patient goal-setting as follows:
When you first see a patient and take their assessment, I always phrase it to them as,
“This is your situation now. What are your problems, frustrations, issues or things that
worry you or that you can’t do at this point in time?” They give a little list, and for some
of them it may be, “I can’t walk.” For others, it may be, “I’m at home in my wheelchair
and I can’t reach the cupboards,” that sort of thing. So, then I say, “Ok, so what would
be your goals, what was it you want to achieve by being fitted with an artificial leg?”
So, they may come up with the same things, “I just want to be able to walk around my
house,” or, “Actually, yeah, I want to be down on the golf course in six weeks,” or, “I
want to be able to climb Mount Everest in six weeks.” So, you start to read the patients
and if someone says something where you’re thinking, uh-oh, that’s really off the scale
of expectation, then I try to say, “Well, while you’re here at this initial rehab, it’s the
first time you’re being fitted with an artificial leg, this is probably what you are going
to achieve by the time you leave our department.
While more experienced members of staff could draw upon their experience to shape
patients’ expectations during goal-setting conversations, juniors lacked confidence as they had
insufficient clinical experience to anticipate realistic outcomes and likely recovery trajectories.
This raises questions as to how effectively patient-centred care can be delivered when neither
the patient nor the member of staff supporting them has a clear idea of what might constitute
appropriate rehabilitation goals. Even senior staff tended to use non-committal language to
communicate their expectations to patients, as described by one practitioner: “I quite often say
to people, ‘I don’t know anyone that’s achieved that in your particular situation, but I’m ready
for you to prove me wrong’”. However, while senior staff felt more comfortable and competent
developing personalised rehabilitation plans that encouraged patients to take responsibility for
11
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
their health and fostered positive behavior change, they often lacked the time to do so. Junior
members of staff, who had more time to spend on such activities, were less able to identify
what might be a realistic goal or how that could be broken down into appropriate steps.
Participants’ definitions of patient-centred care also included patients being proactive
in their rehabilitation, for example, selecting an exercise to complete rather than waiting to be
told what to do while the staff attended to other patients. However, some also recognised that
they did not always explicitly communicate these expectations to patients. One junior
practitioner described how she saw her physiotherapist role as advisory, with the patient in
control of the rehabilitation process, yet did not explain this to patients:
Participant: It’s following our advice but being the locus of control, being your own
case manager.
Interviewer: Do you think you make that clear to patients?
Participant: Well, I don’t blatantly say it out loud, I suppose. But I think, I hope to be
able to do it by asking them, “So, what are your goals for the next seven weeks?” and,
“This is the process.” But I suppose, this is completely unknown to them and they’re
just going through the process and, therefore, they are guided by us because they don’t
know any better.
However, staff were also aware that empowering patients to direct their own activities carried
risks, such as falling. Given that patients outnumbered staff at the centre, it was not possible
for every patient to be supervised all the time during rehabilitation activities. When accidents
did occur, even experienced members of staff questioned their clinical judgement. There are
risks associated with walking on a prosthetic limb, and while some patients would be content
to operate within the safe limits identified by staff, others would push boundaries and attempt
more challenging activities than they were ready for. Thus, the successful delivery of patient-
12
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
centred care in this context relied upon patients having sufficient awareness of the risks
inherent to prosthetic use and being able to balance that awareness with the desire to progress.
Organizational and Interpersonal Challenges
This theme explores the challenges encountered by staff in the course of performing
their roles. At an organizational level, reduced funding and staffing levels, together with the
need to educate juniors and students, increased the pressure on the senior staff. The rotational
nature of the junior positions also presented challenges for those in static roles, as each rotation
brought with it new recruits of varying experience and skill, and the experiential knowledge
accumulated by the previous incumbents was lost. Staff also spoke of the challenges
engendered by the close relationships they developed with their patients, and the need to
maintain a degree of professional and emotional distance.
Many of the challenges described by staff pertained to a lack of funding, which limited
the size of the rehabilitation team and the hours they could work. This had altered the nature
of some participants’ roles, reducing the time available to work with patients and increasing
the pressure to assess and refer on to other services. For example, senior staff recalled having
previously taken patients out of the centre to tackle real-world tasks such as using escalators or
public transport. Now, such opportunities were limited by lack of time, lower staffing levels,
and more stringent health and safety rules. Limited funding also restricted the components that
prosthetists could prescribe, which one senior member of staff described as the most difficult
part of her job: “I think now, actually, the hardest part is money constraints, because we have
to keep to a budget, yet we’re being told we have to see more patients but spend less money,
and that, to anybody logical, doesn’t make any sense.”
The staff in senior roles also found their remit increasing year-on-year as they were
expected to deliver patient care alongside educating new recruits and completing project work
(e.g., audits and developing eligibility criteria for new prosthetic technology). Some expressed
13
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
concern that the increased pressure on their time was having a detrimental impact on the patient
experience. One senior practitioner explained:
What we don’t want to happen is that we’re trying to think so much about our students,
junior staff, and the groups of patients such as the MPK [microprocessor knee] patients
at the moment that, for want of a better word, our bog-standard patients don’t miss out
from their experience of rehab and going through it. They’re our bread and butter really.
But even a single below-knee [amputation] is life-changing for somebody and they
deserve just as much attention from the MDT and from us.
Another senior staff member worried that she was becoming less compassionate and more
abrupt as she had less time to spend listening to her patients. She described the rotation of
junior staff as a “rollercoaster or a hamster wheel, where they move on and you start again.”
Senior staff desired not only greater stability of junior staff, but also the option to choose who
entered the team, having experienced significant variability in the quality of the new recruits.
The junior staff also experienced challenges upon entering the team, describing some of the
more senior members of staff as controlling and unwilling to accept change, which the juniors
felt compromised their development as practitioners. One junior practitioner commented:
There are certain things that I suggest and it’s a bit like, “Oh well, we’ve done that, and
it doesn’t work.” I think they’re very much like, we’re happy to have ideas and
suggestions but, ultimately, I think they’ll have the final say. I can understand; I’m here
for nine months whereas they’re going to be continuing it. But it’s different in other
rotations where team leads or band sevens have been happier for you to try things and,
if it doesn’t work, that’s part of the learning process for myself and the team as well.
So, I suppose, in that sense, I don’t feel like I’ve had much of a service development
role, but maybe that’s because they prefer to have that control over their service.
14
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
At an interpersonal level, staff experienced challenges as a result of the close
relationship they developed with their patients through the lengthy rehabilitation process. As
one senior practitioner reflected: “Some of my patients I know from the first day I walked on
the ward. . . . you feel like you’ve, sort of, grown up together.” Every member of staff described
emotionally investing in their patients, which was exemplified through becoming part of the
patients’ support networks. For example, some patients continued to contact members of staff
directly even after leaving the hospital. The occupational therapists, in particular, described
acting as advocates for their patients, particularly when liaising with disparate health and
community services, as one senior practitioner explained:
I think if you let people know, ‘I’ve made that phone call, I’m chasing it’, they have
confidence in you and that helps a little bit. Even if you can’t change it, I think if they
know you’ve got their back and you are actually actively doing something and not just
sitting back. It gives them little bit of confidence that someone is there fighting their
corner.
However, while the staff valued this close relationship, they also recognised the
potential negative impact of becoming emotionally involved with patients, not only upon their
own well-being, but also on the patients’ recovery. For example, staff sometimes found their
sense of responsibility for their patients permeated their lives outside the hospital. One senior
staff member explained: “I can’t tell you the number of times in the middle of the night I’ve
got up and, well, woken up and found myself sitting on the edge of the bed ready to jump up
and jump out of bed to save someone from falling. . . . And it’s only because one doesn’t wear
an awful lot in bed that you go, ‘Oh, I wouldn’t be dressed like this saving such and such’.”
This sense of responsibility motivated staff to go above and beyond the immediate remit of
their roles in order to support the patients. However, they recognised that, in some instances,
providing this support had a negative effect on them (being taxing and placing additional
15
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
pressures on their time) and upon the patients (causing them to become less proactive and
independent, and delaying access to support). One senor practitioner commented:
I think there is a bit of learned helplessness, particularly if they’ve been in hospital for
a long time. There is that expectation that you will sort it out. So, they will come back
to me and go, ‘Can you sort this out?’ But it’s like, you’re at home, you have the number
for the wheelchair repairs [service], you have to just make the phone call, and now I’m
going to make the phone call on your behalf, but you could have just done it yourself.
Staff sought to address these challenges by maintaining an emotional distance from their
patients. This enabled them to navigate potentially challenging scenarios such as delivering
difficult messages or making decisions the patient may not agree with.
Who Provides Psychological Support?
This theme explores participants’ experiential knowledge of the psychological support patients
required after MLLA, and how the limited clinical psychology resource available at the centre
affected other members of staff. Participants in all roles felt partially responsible for providing
in-the-moment psychological support to their patients, which was particularly challenging for
junior physiotherapists, who lacked the experiential knowledge or formal training they believed
they needed in order to perform this element of the role. This issue illustrates the uniqueness
of the MLLA physiotherapist role, which demanded a more holistic skillset than junior staff
had encountered in other roles.
Participants believed most patients would require psychological support at some point
during their recovery. However, the senior staff had learned through experience that some
patients were better equipped to cope with MLLA than others, depending on their personality,
previous experiences, and coping resources. One senior practitioner reflected:
There are also some patients whose lives have been very easy, for want of a better word,
and suddenly this comes along, and they don’t have the mechanisms to cope with it.
16
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
Sometimes you find people who’ve had a really tough time are actually better at coping
because their life’s always been in turmoil and this is just another spoke in the wheel.
Staff also described how the rehabilitation process brought to light patients’ past difficulties or
traumas. One senior staff member commented: “Coming through rehab doesn’t plaster over
cracks in relationships or cover up things in the past; it normally opens them up.” Another
senior practitioner added: “Amputation is a loss and triggers other losses to come to the surface,
and also other traumas. If anyone’s had any previous traumas, often they are brought back or
brought up by the amputation. So, you do get a certain number of patients who have long-term
issues.”
Despite patients’ need for psychological support, the centre only had limited access to
clinical psychology services. As a result of time limitations, the role of clinical psychologist at
the centre had become primarily focused on assessing and referring rather than on treating.
Consequently, the entire MDT played a role in supporting patients psychologically.
Participants described how patients would open up to them while undertaking a rehabilitation
task, such as practising using the kitchen or climbing stairs. One senior practitioner explained:
Quite often, if we do the classic ‘make a tea’, and they wonder why they’re doing it,
you explain that on a practical front, you know, ‘You’re bending, you’re reaching,
you’re walking on different surfaces, you’re chatting, the cognitive load, blah blah
blah’. But actually, you sit down and chat to them over a cup of tea, and that just seems
different from therapy, and that’s the time I normally talk to them about how they might
be feeling about it.
While senior members of staff felt comfortable providing this support due to their experience
with patients and in life outside the centre, junior staff found this challenging, having received
no formal psychology training. For example, one junior practitioner was reluctant to encourage
patients to open up to her:
17
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
Interviewer: If patients don’t want to discuss their accident, do you try and push it?
Participant: I don’t tend to, no. I don’t think there’s a need to do that. It’s happened
and they’re ready to come to rehab, so just crack on with that. I’m just not very good at
dealing with that sort of stuff.
Interviewer: What makes you say that? What would someone who is “good” at that do?
Participant: I don’t know, sit down and talk about it? I don’t know. I think, say, if one
of the patients was having a bit of a crisis, I’d probably tend to go and speak to someone
that I know is, or think is, better at dealing with that. I don’t know. I’m not very
sympathetic.
One senior practitioner expressed concern that the focus on functional progression in the gym
might deny patients the opportunity to process what had happened to them, observing: “People
[staff] do sometimes forget the psychological bit and they forget that people [patients] are
grieving. So, people [staff] are still surprised when people [patients] burst into tears in the gym
and I’m like, ‘That’s very normal! Don’t panic!’” These discussions revealed a conundrum
whereby senior staff, who were more comfortable providing patients with psychological
support, lacked the requisite time whereas junior staff, with more time, felt unable to do so.
Senior staff attempted to mitigate this issue by purposefully allocating to juniors those patients
who presented with less complex physical and psychological issues. However, most patients
would require a degree of psychological support at some point during their rehabilitation
journey, so this strategy did not completely relieve junior staff of providing this service.
Participants also emphasised the lack of clinical psychological support available to
patients throughout the NHS and in the community, where there is little provision for those
who require ongoing support but are not psychotic. As a result, the staff were concerned that
many individuals struggling post-MLLA became ‘lost in the system’ after leaving the centre,
as one senior practitioner explained:
18
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
Participant: There are patients who have been referred to me, come back at six weeks,
and they’re depressed, and I’m like, what am I going to do? They are stuck in a room,
they can’t actually get out of the house, they haven’t got family, no one is visiting them.
What am I going to do? Who wouldn’t be depressed?
Interviewer: And what do you do?
Participant: I struggle. We try and get local services. I work with the occupational
therapists to try and get voluntary services involved, you know, maybe befriending
teams. But that’s always difficult because you don’t know what their local resources
are. We try and refer them to the GP, but then they probably don’t do anything anyway.
They probably get left.
This participant’s comments revealed a gap in the psychological support services available to
those experiencing difficulties post-MLLA. This reinforces the perception that psychological
support provided by the MDT at the centre might be the only such support patients receive
after loss of a limb.
Prosthetic as a Panacea
This theme explores staff’s perceptions of the effect of the increasing profile of MLLA and
prosthetics on patients’ expectations of rehabilitation. It also addresses the impact of these
unrealistic expectations on the rehabilitation process. Overall, the staff described the increasing
visibility of individuals with MLLA in the media as a positive development that normalised
limb loss and enabled their patients to feel more confident re-entering society. Yet, they also
expressed concern that the media portrayal of prosthetic use was unrealistic and overly positive,
perpetuating the view that a prosthetic could replace the body part that was lost. One senior
practitioner reflected on the inaccurate messages she had seen in the media after the London
2012 Paralympics:
19
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
They had someone [on TV], I think it was someone who wanted a microprocessor knee
and didn’t have one. Anyway, he was carrying the flame I think and had a fall, and then
the commentators went, “If he’d had the knee he needs, that wouldn’t have happened”.
And that’s quite a difficult claim to make, actually. Completely not accurate and they
didn’t consult with any kind of prosthetic expert, of course. So, I do think the media
has a responsibility for selling the idea to patients that you get this [prosthetic] and you
won’t fall over, which is not true.
Participants also noted that surgeons who carried out the amputations sometimes contributed
to unrealistic expectations of life with a prosthesis. Specifically, surgeons often painted an
overly optimistic picture of life with MLLA as they overestimated what prosthetics could offer.
Consequently, many patients arrived at the centre with little or no knowledge of the difficulties
of learning to walk with a prosthesis, or the physical strength, fitness, and cognitive skills it
demands. These unrealistic expectations often extended to life after rehabilitation. For
example, many patients were shocked when staff recommended that they have a wheelchair at
home for the rest of their lives, as they would not be able to wear a prosthetic every day due to
complications such as sores and swelling.
The staff also believed that patients’ families lacked understanding of the challenges of
walking with a prosthesis and, as a result, some put their relatives under pressure to go through
prosthetic rehabilitation. One senior practitioner explained:
A lot of patients have the perception, or their families, people around them have the
perception, ‘You’ve had the amputation, you’re going to get a leg, and then you’re
going to be able to do all the things you want to do’, because they don’t understand
how much effort it is just to put the thing on, to walk in, or the level of balance and
control you need to be able to walk.
20
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
In order to mitigate this pressure, participants described the importance of promoting a realistic
picture during the process of deciding whether to undertake prosthetic rehabilitation. One
senior practitioner explained:
That’s the really important question for a patient to think about: what’s going to be the
added value to my life by having this piece of prosthetic componentry? And that’s one
I would really want them to think very honestly and hard about . . . what is this really
going to add to your life? What bit of your life is this going to make better? So, why
are you putting yourself through a very tiring, very hard work kind of experience, to no
real gain? Apart from the fact that you’ve had a go, you’ve seen what it’s like, you’ve
tried it, and that’s very positive. But then you need to cut your losses. Let’s not carry
on doing this and exhausting it and actually in the end making you feel like a failure.
Staff explained that patients were generally unaware of the cost of the equipment they were
provided with, and of the financial pressure MLLA placed upon the NHS. Not every patient
would benefit from high-end components, yet some still made requests after comparing their
own prosthesis with those they saw other patients using. If patients were provided with
components that did not live up to their (unrealistic) expectations, they tended to scapegoat
both the prosthesis and prosthetist for problems that were often physical or psychological in
nature (i.e., not a result of the prosthesis). One senior practitioner observed:
I think patients put a lot of expectation in their leg, so the prosthetist is in the firing line.
It’s always, ‘The leg’s not doing this. The leg’s not doing that.’ When actually it’s them
that’s not doing the exercises. We often get blamed for life problems that are for other
reasons or health problems, like, ‘Ah well, I can’t exercise because my leg doesn’t fit
properly’. ‘Well, why doesn’t your leg fit properly?’ I think we’re the scapegoat a lot
of the time.
21
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
Participants noticed that the tendency to blame the prosthesis increased as patients aged and
became less physically able, or as their rehabilitation plateaued. One senior practitioner
explained how the prosthesis could also function as a placebo for other problems, even those
of a psychological nature:
In the prosthetic office, there is historically something called ‘The Magic Corner’
where, if someone’s really, like, you can’t sort them out, you’ll take the leg away for
15 to 20 minutes and then take it back and ask, ‘How’s that fitting now?’. ‘Oh, that’s
perfect!’ And you’ve literally done nothing. It’s just, it’s psychological sometimes. It’s
just, like, a placebo. They think it’s making them better and because it’s been gone and
you seem to have done something…I’ve definitely seen it happen and it does work.
This discussion reinforces the emphasis patients place on the prosthesis as both the facilitator
and barrier to successful rehabilitation, such that even psychological challenges are perceived
to be caused or alleviated by a worse or better prosthetic fit.
Crash Landing
This theme explores staff’s perceptions of the transition from the rehabilitation centre to home.
This was agreed to be a critical and challenging period for patients, as they encounter the reality
of day-to-day life with MLLA in an environment not designed for prosthetics and wheelchairs,
and in a society in which they are a minority. In particular, staff described how the
rehabilitation gym was not a good representation of day-to-day life, meaning that the reality of
living with MLLA would not become apparent until patients were out in the ‘real world’. One
senior practitioner observed:
When they go home it’s not the end of their rehab; it’s actually the beginning of learning
how to live life as an amputee. It’s a bit like driving, you know? You learn, you have
your driving lessons with your instructor and you think you’ve passed your test and
22
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
you’ve learned and, actually, it’s when you’re out on the roads by yourself that you
realise you haven’t learned at all and this is where the learning begins.
Staff described how patients could be discharged into unsuitable housing (either because no
suitable alternative was available, or the patient did not wish to move) or into a property
awaiting adaptation. Some patients were forced to live in a microenvironment; eating, sleeping,
washing, and toileting in one room. Staff explained how such issues are not prioritised by social
services, meaning that patients in social housing may wait for a year or more before adaptations
are made. The staff believed the home environment and patients’ ability to function in it played
a crucial part in the adjustment process, and worried for those who were discharged into
inaccessible and isolated environments with no routine or peers to support the transition. One
senior practitioner explained how some patients needed to experience living in what she
deemed to be an unsuitable home before considering alternative options:
Quite often, getting them home with the houses they live in is a challenge, but they
want to go home, so I will get them home…with compromise. That’s the key words:
with compromise. And sometimes they have to go back to that home to realise that
that’s the compromise they’re making, and whether they want to actually live with that
compromise or not.
The staff believed that even those patients living with family members felt isolated as nobody
in their home environment understood what they were going through. By treating the patient
differently before and after MLLA, some families made it more difficult for patients to come
to terms with losing a limb. One senior practitioner commented: “I feel that we treat people
quite normally, and [patients] could deal with it more, but at home it was much more difficult
to be treated normally, because everyone’s treating you…it’s as if you’re special, isn’t it?”
Even those patients who wanted to participate in activities with other individuals with MLLA
23
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
often struggled to do so due to barriers such as lack of transport, lack of support, and loss of
confidence, which contributed to reduced activity levels. One senior practitioner explained:
Over the years we’ve tried to encourage people to carry on going to the swimming
group that we used to go to. You know, lovely disabled access, a group of amputees
there, but everyone talks about it so much, the barriers that stop people doing it. They
get home by themselves and then they think, “I just can’t do it.” Then they come back
[for reviews] and they’re not really effectively using their artificial leg either. They
think, ‘Oh, actually, no. I found it really hard so my leg’s in the corner, in the cupboard’.
The occupational therapists, in particular, spoke of how beneficial it would be to be able to
offer a graded discharge, whereby patients could move into an assisted living environment and
learn to live independently with MLLA but with support available should they need it.
However, it was challenging to source support for patients who needed it due to the lack of
community services available.
Overall, staff felt that patients left the centre unprepared for the challenges that lay
ahead. They also acknowledged the minimal impact they had on patients’ lives outside the
hospital, and that the review system did not necessarily identify those who were struggling.
Although patients were invited to return to the centre for a review appointment at six weeks
and six months post-discharge, the gap between appointments could feel lengthy to a patient
who is struggling. The staff also felt that lack of time turned the reviews into a tick-box exercise
rather than an opportunity for in-depth discussion. Although returning patients completed the
Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (Zigmond & Snaith, 1983) and were referred on to a
clinical psychologist if their scores indicated the presence of depressive symptoms, participants
questioned how effectively they could identify those in need of assistance. One senior
practitioner reflected:
24
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
We do have areas where we could highlight if a person is struggling, and we have things
that we can offer them. Some patients don’t want to take us up, some patients may well
fall through the net because maybe they don’t come for their six-week, six-month
[reviews]. Maybe they’re sitting out there floundering away.
However, in the absence of greater time, resources, or improved community services, the
participants felt unable to do more to support patients after discharge from the centre.
Discussion
With this study, we have made novel contributions to the MLLA rehabilitation literature in
four ways. First, we have added to a very limited pool of literature exploring and articulating
the experiential knowledge of staff in the context of MLLA rehabilitation. Second, we have
provided a novel exploration of the experiences of junior staff in rotational roles, the difficulties
they face in an environment that relies heavily on experiential knowledge, and the effect of this
rotation on senior staff. Third, we have illustrated the challenges associated with the practical
application of patient-centred care models in MLLA rehabilitation settings. Finally, we have
described the negative effect of unrealistic beliefs about and expectations of prosthetics on both
patients and members of staff.
Through this research, we have contributed to an understanding of how staff develop
their practice philosophy in the context of MLLA rehabilitation. To illustrate, the staff
described their roles as sources of pride and satisfaction through making a difference to each
patient. However, the quality of this ‘difference’ and participants’ definitions of what
constituted successful rehabilitation varied between those with different roles and experience.
For juniors, success was judged primarily on the basis of patients’ functional achievements; at
the point of discharge, was the patient able to walk with a prosthetic limb? Through experience,
this focus on visible and objectively measurable functional progression developed into a more
holistic and multidimensional approach to therapy that valued quality of life above functional
25
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
capability. This aligns with the findings of Lloyd, Roberts, and Freeman (2014) who reported
that the focus of physiotherapists working in a stroke rehabilitation setting shifted with
experience from an initial mechanistic view to a greater focus on patient empowerment. In the
context of this study, this shift seems indicative of a tension between the values engendered
through physiotherapy training and the health service structure in the UK (i.e., measurable
functional progression), and the values of staff with experiential knowledge of supporting
recovery after MLLA (i.e., living well). We suggest that addressing this tension explicitly
during the supervision process may support novice practitioners in developing a whole-person
perspective that promotes patient agency in addition to functional progression.
Murray and Forshaw (2014) argued that, particularly in the West, health services are
configured in ways that value and promote prosthetic use. When considered alongside the
present findings and the characteristics of the MLLA population in the UK (primarily elderly
and suffering from comorbidities), questions are raised with regards to the extent to which this
philosophy is adaptive for the patient or cost-effective for the NHS. While there are undoubted
physical and psychological benefits to enabling MLLA patients to be physically active (e.g.,
Wadey & Day, 2018), should prosthetics be at the heart of this strategy? The accounts of senior
staff interviewed here revealed a tension between their experiential knowledge of how to help
patients achieve psychological well-being, some of whom may be hindered rather than helped
by a prosthesis, and the norms operating in health services (e.g., surgeons, physiotherapy
training) and more broadly (e.g., in the media). Given that individual subjectivities of limb loss
and prosthesis use are influenced by the cultural norms which surround the person (Murray &
Forshaw, 2014), this mismatch goes some way towards explaining the high expectations of
patients entering into prosthetic rehabilitation, and also of their families.
Consistent with the limited number of extant studies exploring the presentation of
prosthetics in the media (e.g., Murray & Forshaw, 2014; Sansam et al., 2014), participants
26
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
believed the media gave an overly positive portrayal of prosthetic use that reflected neither the
challenges of rehabilitation nor the experiences of most patients. We have also revealed more
about the effects of high expectations and a too-positive view of prosthetic rehabilitation. For
example, the staff believed that patients’ high expectations were associated with perceived
failure when they were unable to live up to those expectations, tending to scapegoat the
prosthetic limb and the prosthetist who fitted it. This suggests some patients view the prosthesis
as a panacea for a range of issues, from poor health to a lack of self-care and low motivation,
thus absolving themselves of responsibility for any perceived failure. This was captured
succinctly by the vignette of the Magic Corner, whereby patients believe the prosthesis has
been adjusted and, thus, their problem ‘solved’, even when no changes have been made. While
this scapegoating of the prosthesis probably has a protective effect with regards to short-term
affect, it seems likely to have a negative effect on the patient’s relationship with their prosthetist
and, potentially, that patient’s long-term physical and psychological health.
Staff also believed that unrealistically positive cultural norms with regards to prosthetic
rehabilitation encouraged families to pressurise patients into undertaking such a programme
even when it was clinically inappropriate (e.g., too physically demanding or not conducive to
meeting the patient’s goals). Similarly, Stabell and Naden (2006) found relatives’ expectations
and demands were often unrealistic in terms of what rehabilitation and community care could
offer. Where there was disagreement between what the service could offer and the beliefs of
the patient and family, members of staff were faced with the difficult task of managing
expectations and successfully engaging the patient in decisions about care. However, even staff
with many years’ experience questioned their judgement in the absence of data. It is hoped
that, by articulating staff’s experiential knowledge, this study will facilitate the translation of
practice-based evidence into evidence-based practice, thereby addressing van Twillert et al.’s
27
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
(2012) comment that clinical knowledge in MLLA needs further study to make it suitable for
informing service improvement.
In addition to questioning their judgement and practice, our participants sometimes
perceived a disparity between their own goals and priorities, and those of their patients. The
staff wanted patients to take a central role in their care, yet this was not always explicitly
communicated, particularly in the case of junior staff. Further, patients were expected to lead
their own care only within certain (possibly implicit) parameters set by the staff. When viewed
in the context of previous findings, it seems plausible that, without explicit communication,
patients may feel subjugated in a way that undermines the clinicians’ attempts to practice
patient-centred care. For example, Harrison and Williams (2000) reported that, where
physiotherapists felt the power imbalance between themselves and their patients was not
significant, the patients found it overwhelming to the extent that their experiences did not
reflect the collaborative patient-centred care model promoted by government policy. Financial
and organizational factors, as reported here, can also cause dilemmas in patient-clinician
interactions and a deprioritization of patient-centred goals (Levack, Dean, Siegert, &
McPherson, 2011). This may cause patients to perceive a lack of agency and that the staff do
not care about them, which may contribute to a loss of trust in the rehabilitation team
(Manderson & Warren, 2010).
The relationship between staff and patient, and the latter’s engagement with physical
rehabilitation, may be further complicated by the individual’s response to the loss of a limb.
Participants held varied beliefs about the role of physical rehabilitation in psychological
recovery after MLLA, with some focusing on exercise as a means of processing the
experience, and others on giving patients time to grieve before encouraging functional
progression. This echoes the work of other researchers (e.g., McCreaddie et al., 2010;
Setchell, Abrams, McAdam, & Gibson, 2019) who have emphasised the pressure patients
28
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
perceive to maintain positive affect throughout rehabilitation, which may preclude the
expression of grief. Staff in the current study also described the limited clinical psychology
support services available to individuals with MLLA, both in the rehabilitation centre and
after discharge. This was not because the clinicians believed it was not needed, but due to a
lack of funding and long-term mental health services to which to refer patients. Indeed, the
pressure on NHS mental health services due to financial constraints and staff shortages has
been well documented elsewhere (e.g., Pym, 2018). The present findings indicate that, in the
context of MLLA rehabilitation, a lack of clinical psychology support resulted in the MDT
becoming jointly responsible for monitoring and supporting the mental health of many
patients. This contrasts with the best practice described by Harvey et al. (2012) in their report
on rehabilitation services delivered to military veterans at the Centers for Excellent in
Amputee Care in the USA. In these centers, all patients with limb loss are seen by the
Preventative Psychiatric Consultative Liaison Service, which “ensures early evaluation and
intervention, but also helps to destigmatize any negative perception about seeking psychiatric
help” (p. 50). Within the context of the present study, where resources are limited, ongoing
clinical psychology support (as opposed to assessment and referral) was reserved only for
those who demonstrated clear psychological pathology, and rarely extended beyond the point
of discharge.
The consequent demand upon the MDT to offer patients psychological support was an
aspect of the role that junior members of staff, in particular, found extremely challenging,
having received no psychological training at university or in student work placements. It is
possible that some patient behaviours which junior staff ascribed to poor engagement (e.g., low
motivation or dependence on passive therapies) may in fact be indicative of psychosocial
challenges (e.g., depression, anxiety) that were not recognised and, thus, were overlooked
(Gardner et al., 2017). Senior members of staff, in contrast, reported feeling more comfortable
29
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
offering patients a degree of psychological support, yet lacked the time to do so. This illustrates
a conundrum almost certainly experienced in other healthcare settings: senior staff have the
expertise but not the time to support patients with subclinical mental health challenges, whereas
junior staff have more time but lack confidence and expertise. Given the heavy burden of
MLLA on NHS funds (Moxey et al., 2010), it seems unlikely that the provision of specialist
psychology support for rehabilitation programmes will increase. Therefore, it may be more
beneficial to focus on up-skilling those members of staff who spend the most time with the
patients: the physiotherapists.
This challenge of provided patients with psychological support also raises questions at
policy level around the practicality of patient-centred care against a backdrop of reduced
funding and staffing levels, and the impact that has upon patient-facing staff at all levels.
Similarly, lack of time and resource were the primary barriers reported by nurses in Turner et
al.'s (2017) study of the provision of psychological support in a cardiac rehabilitation setting.
In order to address this challenge, the authors recommended that the nurses coordinate with
psychological well-being practitioners to provide psychological support in cardiac
programmes. A similar approach could be utilised in prosthetic rehabilitation programmes,
where staff are similarly time-constrained and struggling to provide psychological support
alongside their additional workload.
This study also offers a novel perspective of the transition from hospital to home, which
has received little research attention in the context of MLLA (for one exception, see van
Twillert, Stuive, Geertzen, Postema, & Lettinga, 2014). Staff in the current study
conceptualised discharge from the centre not as the end of rehabilitation, but as the start of a
longer process. This is in line with extant literature indicating that the reality of living with
MLLA does not become apparent until patients are living independently in their own homes
(e.g., Horgan & MacLachlan, 2004). Staff perceived this transition to be the greatest challenge
30
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
faced by individuals with MLLA, characterised by a loss of peer and staff support, reduced
accessibility, and poor community service support (e.g., van Twillert et al., 2014). This study
also offers an additional dimension to previous findings, illustrating the lengths that patients
will go to in order to return to their own homes rather than moving to somewhere new and
more suited to their needs. This highlights the unique significance of an individual’s home
along dimensions other than functionality (e.g., social and personal meaning), closer attention
to which may enhance the transition experience (Hodson, Aplin, & Gustafsson, 2016).
Finally, members of staff felt somewhat out of touch with patients’ experiences after
their departure from the centre, as they doubted patients’ honesty and the effectiveness of
information-gathering during post-discharge review appointments. Sansam et al. (2014)
reported similar concerns, suggesting some individuals prefer to be a ‘good’ patient and ‘pass’
the assessment rather than openly addressing their struggles. At the other end of the spectrum,
staff in the current study described how other patients expected them to continue to solve any
issues encountered, even once the patient had returned home. The staff recognised that, by
acting as an advocate for patients during the initial rehabilitation phase, they risked the patients
becoming less proactive in solving problems for themselves. This learned helplessness
(Seligman, 1975) echoes reports from van Twillert et al. (2014) that, while some individuals
with MLLA actively seek solutions to problems such as prosthetic fitting, others may
maladaptively accommodate the issue (e.g., becoming less functionally active upon
encountering prosthetic fitting issue) if assistance is not immediately available. The present
findings, therefore, add weight to van Twillert’s conclusion that it would be helpful to teach
patients a generic approach to problem-solving during the initial rehabilitation phase to
enhance patients’ confidence, prepare them for the post-rehabilitation phase, and minimise
functional decline. This patient education could be supported with practical training for junior
staff in basic counselling and communication skills to help them feel comfortable listening to
31
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
patients, shaping their goals and expectations of life post-MLLA, and promoting self-
regulation strategies. This would help address concerns highlighted by staff not only in this
research, but in work by van Twillert et al. (2014), around patients’ ability to cope with the
transition from hospital to home.
References
Aronson, L. (2013). “Good” patients and “difficult” patients - rethinking our definitions. New
England Journal of Medicine, 369(9), 796–797. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp1306553
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2012). Thematic analysis. In H. Cooper, P. M. Camic, D. Long, A.
Panter, D. Rindskof, & K. Sher (Eds.), APA Handbook of Research Methods in
Psychology: Vol. 2. Research Designs. Washington DC: American Psychological
Association. https://doi.org/10.1037/13620-004
Braun, V., Clarke, V., & Weate, P. (2016). Using thematic analysis in sport and exercise
research. In Routledge handbook of qualitative research methods in sport and exercise
(pp. 191–205). London: Routledge.
Burnard, P. (2005). Counselling skills for health professionals (4th ed.). Cheltenham, UK:
Nelson Thornes Ltd.
Cresswell, J. W., & Miller, D. L. (2000). Determining validity in qualitative inquiry. Theory
into Practice, 3, 39, 124–130.
https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/s15430421tip3903_2
Cumming, J., Barr, S., & Howe, T. (2006). Prosthetic rehabilitation for older dysvascular
people following a unilateral transfemoral amputation. Cochrane Database System
Review, 4, CD005260.
Ellis, K. (1993). Power games. Community Care, 18, 20–21.
Gallagher, P., & MacLachlan, M. (2001). Adjustment to an artificial limb: A qualitative
32
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
perspective. Journal of Health Psychology, 6(1), 85–100.
https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/135910530100600107
Gardner, T., Refshauge, K., Smith, L., McAuley, J., Hübscher, M., & Goodall, S. (2017).
Physiotherapists’ beliefs and attitudes influence clinical practice in chronic low back
pain: a systematic review of quantitative and qualitative studies. Journal of
Physiotherapy, 63(3), 132–143. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphys.2017.05.017
Harvey, Z. T., Loomis, G. A., Mitsch, S., Murphy, I. C., Griffin, S. C., Potter, B. K., &
Pasquina, P. (2012). Advanced rehabilitation techniques for the multi-limb
amputee. Journal of Surgical Orthopaedic Advances, 21(1), 50.
Hodson, T., Aplin, T., & Gustafsson, L. (2016). Understanding the dimensions of home for
people returning home post stroke rehabilitation. British Journal of Occupational
Therapy, 79(7), 427–433. https://doi.org/10.1177/0308022615619420
Lapadat, J. C., & Lindsay, A. C. (1999). Transcription in research and practice: From
standardization of technique to interpretive positionings. Qualitative Inquiry, 5(1), 64–
86. https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/107780049900500104
Levack, W. M., Dean, S. G., Siegert, R. J., & McPherson, K. M. (2011). Navigating patient-
centered goal setting in inpatient stroke rehabilitation: How clinicians control the
process to meet perceived professional responsibilities. Patient Education and
Counseling, 85(2), 206–213. https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pec.2011.01.011
Liu, F., Williams, R. M., Liu, H. E., & Chien, N. H. (2010). The lived experience of persons
with lower extremity amputation. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 19(15–16), 2152–2161.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2702.2010.03256.x
Lloyd, A., Roberts, A. R., & Freeman, J. A. (2014). “Finding a balance” in involving patients
in goal setting early after stroke: A physiotherapy perspective. Physiotherapy Research
International, 19(3), 147–157. https://doi.org/10.1002/pri.1575
33
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
Manderson, L., & Warren, N. (2010). The art of (re) learning to walk: trust on the
rehabilitation ward. Qualitative Health Research, 20(10), 1418-1432.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732310373105
McCreaddie, M., Payne, S., & Froggatt, K. (2010). Ensnared by positivity: A constructivist
perspective on “being positive” in cancer care. European Journal of Oncology Nursing,
14(4), 283–290. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejon.2010.03.002
McCreaddie, M., & Wiggins, S. (2009). Reconciling the good patient persona with
problematic and non-problematic humour: A grounded theory. International Journal of
Nursing Studies, 46(8), 1079–1091. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2009.01.008
Moxey, P. W., Hofman, D., Hinchliffe, R. J., Jones, K., Thompson, M. M., & Holt, P. J. E.
(2010). Epidemiological study of lower limb amputation in England between 2003 and
2008. British Journal of Surgery, 97(9), 1348–1353. https://doi.org/10.1002/bjs.7092
Norlyk, A., Martinsen, B., & Kjaer-Petersen, K. (2013). Living with clipped wings - Patients’
experience of losing a leg. International Journal of Qualitative Studies on Health and
Well-Being, 8(21891). https://doi.org/10.3402/qhw.v8i0.21891
Pym, H. (2018). Budget 2018: “NHS will face cuts as well as gains.” Retrieved May 9, 2018,
from https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-46036800
Research and Disability Clinical Reference Group. (n.d.). Complex disability equipment –
prosthetic specialised services for people of all ages with limb loss. Retrieved October
18, 2018, from https://www.england.nhs.uk/commissioning/wp-
content/uploads/sites/12/2015/01/d01-serv-spec-dis-equ-prosth.pdf
Robinson, V., Sansam, K., Hirst, L., & Neumann, V. (2010). Major lower limb amputation -
what, why and how to achieve the best results. Orthopaedics and Trauma, 24(4), 276–
285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mporth.2010.03.017
34
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
Sanders, P., Wadey, R., Day, M., & Winter, S. (2019). Qualitative fieldwork in medical
contexts: confessions of a neophyte researcher. Qualitative Research in Sport,
Exercise and Health, 11(1), 106-118.
Seligman, M. E. P. (1975). Helplessness: On depression, development and death. San
Francisco, CA: Freeman.
Setchell, J., Abrams, T., McAdam, L. C., & Gibson, B. E. (2019). Cheer* in health care
practice: What it excludes and why it matters. Qualitative Health Research,
104973231983823. https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732319838235
Smith, B. (2017). Generalizability in qualitative research: Misunderstandings, opportunities
and recommendations for the sport and exercise sciences. Qualitative Research in Sport,
Exercise and Health, 10, 137–149.
https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/2159676X.2017.1393221
Sparkes, A. C., & Smith, B. (2014). Qualitative research methods in sport, exercise and
health. Abingdon, UK: Routledge.
St George’s University Hospitals. (2018). Referral for limb fitting. Retrieved May 10, 2019,
from https://www.stgeorges.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/QMH_LFDB_02.pdf
Stabell, A., & Naden, D. (2006). Patients’ dignity in a rehabilitation ward: ethical challenges
for nursing staff. Nursing Ethics, 13(3), 236–248.
Turner, K. M., Winder, R., Campbell, J. L., Richards, D. A., Gandhi, M., Dickens, C. M., &
Richards, S. (2017). Patients’ and nurses’ views on providing psychological support
within cardiac rehabilitation programmes: a qualitative study. British Medical Journal
Open, 7, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2017-017510
van Twillert, S., Geertzen, J., Hemminga, T., Postema, K., & Lettinga, A. (2012).
Reconsidering evidence-based practice in prosthetic rehabilitation: A shared enterprise.
Prosthetics and Orthotics International, 37(3), 203–211.
35
PROSTHETIC REHABILITATION IN PRACTICE
https://doi.org/10.1177/0309364612459541
van Twillert, S., Stuive, I., Geertzen, J. H. B., Postema, K., & Lettinga, A. T. (2014).
Functional performance, participation and autonomy after discharge from prosthetic
rehabilitation: Barriers, facilitators and outcomes. Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine,
46(9), 915–923. https://doi.org/10.2340/16501977-1846
Wadey, R., & Day, M. (2018). A longitudinal examination of leisure time physical activity
following amputation in England. Psychology of Sport & Exercise, 37, 251–261.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychsport.2017.11.005
Williams, T. L., Ma, J. K., & Martin Ginis, K. A. (2017). Participant experiences and
perceptions of physical activity-enhancing interventions for people with physical
impairments and mobility limitations: A meta-synthesis of qualitative research evidence.
Health Psychology Review, 11(2), 1–37.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2017.1299027
36