Caietal.Trials (2021) 22:91
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13063-021-05031-z
STUDY PROTOCOL Open Access
Evaluating the effect of immersive virtual
reality technology on gait rehabilitation in
stroke patients: a study protocol for a
randomized controlled trial
Huihui Cai1,2† , Tao Lin1,2† , Lina Chen1, Huidan Weng1, Ruihan Zhu1, Ying Chen1* and Guoen Cai1*
Abstract
Background: The high incidence of cerebral apoplexy makes it one of themost important causes of adult
disability. Gait disorder is one of thehallmarksymptoms inthe sequelae of cerebral apoplexy. The recovery of
walking ability is critical for improving patients’quality of life. Innovativevirtual reality technology has been widely
used in post-stroke rehabilitation, whose effectivenessand safety have been widely verified. To date, however, there
are few studies evaluatingthe effect of immersive virtual reality on stroke-related gait rehabilitation. This study
outlines the application of immersive VR-assisted rehabilitation for gait rehabilitationof stroke patients for
comparative evaluationwith traditional rehabilitation.
Methods: The study describesa prospective, randomized controlled clinical trial. Thirty-six stroke patients will be
screened and enrolled as subjects within 1month of initial stroke and randomized intotwo groups. The VRTgroup
(n=18) will receive VR-assisted training (30min) 5days/week for 3weeks. The non-VRT group (n=18) will receive
functional gait rehabilitation training (30min)5days/week for 3weeks. The primary outcomes and secondary
outcomes will be conducted before intervention, 3weeks after intervention, and 6months after intervention. The
primary outcomes will includetime “up& go”test (TUGT). The secondaryoutcomeswill include MMT muscle
strength grading standard (MMT), Fugal-Meyer scale (FMA), motor function assessment scale (MAS), improved
Barthel index scale (ADL), step with maximum knee angle, total support time, step frequency,step length, pace,
and stride length.
Discussion: Virtual reality is an innovativetechnologywith broad applications, current and prospective. Immersive
VR-assisted rehabilitation in patients with vivid treatmentscenarios inthe form ofvirtual games will stimulate
patients’interest through active participation.The feedback ofVR games can also provide patients with
performance awareness and effectfeedback, which could be incentivizing. This study may reveal an improved
method of stroke rehabilitation which can be helpful for clinical decision-making and future practice.
Trial registration: Chinese Clinical Trial Registry ChiCTR1900025375.Registered on25 August 2019
Keywords: Immersive virtual reality, Stroke rehabilitation, Gait rehabilitation, Randomized controlled trials
*Correspondence:2320609050@qq.com;cgessmu@fmu.edu.cn
†HuihuiCaiandTaoLinareco-firstauthors.
1DepartmentofNeurology,FujianMedicalUniversityUnionHospital,Institute
ofClinicalNeurology,FujianMedicalUniversity,Fuzhou350001,Fujian,China
Fulllistofauthorinformationisavailableattheendofthearticle
©TheAuthor(s).2021OpenAccessThisarticleislicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0InternationalLicense,
whichpermitsuse,sharing,adaptation,distributionandreproductioninanymediumorformat,aslongasyougive
appropriatecredittotheoriginalauthor(s)andthesource,providealinktotheCreativeCommonslicence,andindicateif
changesweremade.Theimagesorotherthirdpartymaterialinthisarticleareincludedinthearticle'sCreativeCommons
licence,unlessindicatedotherwiseinacreditlinetothematerial.Ifmaterialisnotincludedinthearticle'sCreativeCommons
licenceandyourintendeduseisnotpermittedbystatutoryregulationorexceedsthepermitteduse,youwillneedtoobtain
permissiondirectlyfromthecopyrightholder.Toviewacopyofthislicence,visithttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
TheCreativeCommonsPublicDomainDedicationwaiver(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/)appliestothe
datamadeavailableinthisarticle,unlessotherwisestatedinacreditlinetothedata.
Caietal.Trials (2021) 22:91 Page2of11
Background experiencecontrollablemovementoroperationinasim-
Stroke is a serious disease with a high disability rate. ulated virtual environment, so as to achieve the rebuild-
Often occurring in elderly populations, stroke-related ingorrestoringofphysicalfunctions.
disability contributes one of the main causes of adult Immersive VR researches have been reported in the
disability [1]. Studies show that stroke survivors experi- field of pain medicine [17]. In the field of post-stroke re-
ence residual physical dysfunction which has a great im- habilitation, immersive VR has also been reported in
pact on their ability to live. Studies have reported that upper limb motor function and cognitive ability [16, 18].
55–80% of stroke survivors demonstrate continuous However, a few studies have previously explored the ap-
motor dysfunction, decreased quality of life, and limited plication of immersive VR-assisted training in gait re-
activities in daily life [1–4]. Other studies have reported habilitation after stroke. For example, Biffi et al. found
that 80% of stroke patients experience movement disor- that immersive virtual reality platform enhances the
ders, including loss of balance and gait ability [1, 3]. The walking ability of children with acquired brain injuries
disease-related movement disorders and the subsequent [19] and research by Irene Cortes-Perez has shown that
decrease in daily living activity can be a great burden to immersive virtual reality improves balance in stroke pa-
patients, their families, and society. Gait disorder is one tients and reduces the risk of falls [20]. Thus, research
of the most common symptoms in stroke sequelae; thus, on immersive VR-assisted training in gait rehabilitation
the recovery of walking ability is the key to improving requires its own dedicated investigation. As a VR device
patients’ self-care ability and quality of life. Compared of reasonable cost, it has become a powerful research
with that of the healthy people, the gait of patients with tool for scientific researchers [21, 22]. This study will
cerebral apoplexy often manifests as slowed, shortened apply the immersive device to execute VR scenes of re-
standingtimeontheparalyzedside,tooearly toesfalling habilitation training according to clinical practice, so as
when standing, etc. [5]. As such, gait rehabilitation is to systematically evaluate the application of immersive
often the primary goal of stroke rehabilitation [6–8]. As VR technology in the rehabilitation of stroke gait
the population continues to age, an increasing number disorders.
of stroke patients are posed to experience great chal-
lenges to disease-related effects. In turn, improving the Methods
efficiency of rehabilitation strategies remains of para- Aim
mount importance. The aim is to assess the effect of immersive VR-assisted
Virtualreality(VR)isaninnovativetooltorealize con- rehabilitation training for stroke patients with gait
nection, operation, and interaction between human disorders.
vision and computer-simulated scenarios [9]. Non-
immersive VR (for example Xbox Kinect) has been ap- Studydesign
plied inclinicaltrialsofstrokerehabilitation [10,11].VR The study designis asingle-blindrandomized controlled
training experience is interesting and enjoyable for the trial. Other details are described in other sections of the
patient, which reduces fatigue, keeps patients in a happy document.
mood, and reduces the boredom of repetitive, conven- The protocol will strictly comply with the medical eth-
tional rehabilitation. Non-immersive VR-assisted re- ics set forth by the medical ethics committee Fujian
habilitation is proposed to provide a more personalized Medical University Union Hospital. Participants are allo-
intervention therapy [12]. VR training for stroke patients cated to the virtual reality gait (VR) training group or
can therefore improve the participation and autonomy the non-virtual reality gait (non-VR) training group. A
of patients in the rehabilitation process, qualities that flowchartoftheexperimentalprocessisshowninFig.1.
have been shown to be more cost and resource effective A checklist of Standard Protocol Items: Recommenda-
[13]. Overall, non-immersive VR has been shown to in- tions for Interventional Trials (SPIRIT) is provided in
crease limb function learning and improves the quality Fig.2.
oflife[14].
Recently, immersive VR is a novel VR type. Immersive Participants
VR involves a head-mounted display with visual and Inclusioncriteria:(1)Aged40–80years. (2)Patientswith
auditory cues and controllers using haptic (sense of ischemic cerebrovascular disease who met the classifica-
touch) feedback in a 3-dimensional environment [15]. tion and diagnosis criteria of cerebrovascular disease
Immersive VR is a technology that provides more realis- confirmed by head CT or MRI scan [23]. (3) The first
tic environment scene design and object tracking than ever stroke and initial stroke onset of 1month or less.
previous ordinary VR [16], which provides virtual inter- (4) Walking dysfunction (the standard of walking dys-
action and real-time feedback in vision, touch, hearing, function in stroke patients was patients aged <60years
and even motion in realistic scenarios. Patients can with 10-m walking time≥10s; patients aged 60–69years
Caietal.Trials (2021) 22:91 Page3of11
Fig.1Researchflowchartoftheexperiment
with 10-m walking time≥12.5s; patients aged >70years Recruitmentandconsent
with 10-m walking time≥16.6s). (5) The patient can The subjects in the trial will be recruited from inpatients
stand with the help of one person or with crutches and in the Fujian Medical University Union Hospital. Their
can walk at least l0 m. (6) Lower limb muscle strength attending physician will brief the patients about the
level of3orabove. study. If the patients express interest, the physician will
Exclusion criteria: (1) Patients with serious behavioral provide the patient’s contact information to the research
problems or mental disorders. (2) Patients with cognitive team after obtaining the consent of the patients. The re-
impairment (MMSE ≤24 points) unable to cooperate search team will obtain additional information about the
with training. (3) Patients with cerebellar stroke, recent patients through interviews and further describe the trial
lower extremity deep vein thrombosis, quadriplegia, Par- and precautions/benefits to the patients in detail. Add-
kinson’s disease, lower limb fractures, or recent myocar- itionally, the research team will conduct a qualification
dial infarction. (4) Patients with vital organ (heart, lung, examination to verify whether the patients meet the in-
liver, kidney, etc.) failure, malignant tumor, or other un- clusion criteria. If the patient qualifies and agrees to par-
stable condition. (5) Patients with history of cerebrovas- ticipate in the study, he/she will then be asked to sign
cular accident before this stroke and/or walking the informed consent form and submit the relevant per-
dysfunction. (6) Those who have previously completed sonal written materials. Communication and coordin-
routinegaittraining. ation with patients’ families will occur as necessary. On
the consent form, participants will be asked if they agree
Setting with the usage of their data should they choose to with-
Rehabilitation training and evaluation of this study will draw from the trial. Participants will also be asked for
be conducted in the inpatient ward of the Department their permission to share relevant data by the research
of Neurology of Fujian Medical University Union Hos- team with people from the Universities taking part in
pital,China. the research or from regulatory authorities, where
Caietal.Trials (2021) 22:91 Page4of11
Fig.2StandardProtocolItems:RecommendationsforInterventionalTrials(SPIRIT)figure(numbersbesidetrepresentweeks)
relevant. This trial does not involve collecting the bio- InterventiondesignoftheVRtraininggroupandnon-VR
logical specimensfor storage. traininggroup
The interventions ofthe two groups are based on there-
Randomizationandblinding search intervention description of TIDieR template [24],
The eligible participants based on the inclusion and ex- shown in Table 1. Relevant concomitant care and inter-
clusion criteria will be randomly allocated in a 1:1 ratio ventionsarepermittedduringthetrial.
to either the VR training group and the non-VR training
group. The attending physician will obtain the informed VRsystem
consent and refer the participants to the study coordin- As shown in Fig. 3, the VR system consists of (1) a hel-
ator after their baseline information has been assessed. met display (HMD) (HTC Vive Pro), (2) Vive wireless
The participants will be randomly assigned to the VR suite, and (3) Vive locator equipped with Steam tracking
training group and non-VR training group by the study technology, g-sensor correction, gyroscope, proximity
coordinator. A random allocation sequence will be gen- distance sensor, and pupil distance sensor to sense the
erated in advance using a computerized random number accurate position and motion of the subject. The system
generator by a biostatistician who will be not involved in also includes (4) two operating handles and (5) com-
this trial. The study coordinator who will be not in- puter configuration (a computer equipped with Intel®-
volved in recruiting participants will keep the random Core™ i7-7700k (4.20GHz) quad-core processor, 32 GB
list and will assign the treatment plans accordingly. The random access memory, and 8 GB Nvidia GeForce GTX
biostatistician and research coordinator will keep the 1080graphicscard). (6)FourVR-assistedlowerlimbgait
random list until the end of the research to ensure that training scenarios will be available for patients to choose
the assignment is blind to the participants and the at- from (nine-grid training, single-plank bridge training,
tendingphysician who willrecruit participants. mountain climbing and climbing stairs training, and
Although it is impossible to blind the participants and crossbar training). VR training scenarios are shown in
rehabilitation trainer due to this being a non- Fig.4.
pharmacological intervention trial, the allocation will be
blind to the outcome assessors and the data analyst. Par- VRtraininggroup
ticipants will be instructed not to disclose the allocation The VR training group will receive 30min per day for 3
totheattendingphysicianandtheoutcomeassessors. weeks (5days/week) of VR-assisted gait rehabilitation
Caietal.Trials (2021) 22:91 Page5of11
Table1ResearchinterventionsoftheVRtraininggroupandthenon-VRtraininggroupbaseonTIDieRtemplate
Item VRtraininggroup Non-VRtraininggroup
1.Brief VRT Non-VRT
name
2.Why 1.Fromthemechanismofaction,VRtrainingcaninducecorticalrecombinationofneuralmotorpathways;
2.Fromaneurologicalpointofview,repeatedtrainingcanenhancethesynapticfunctionoftheaffectedlimbandincreasethe
neuroplasticityinducedbymovement[25];
3.Fromtheperspectiveofkinematics,repetitivemovementisthebasicconditionforacquiringamotorskill.However,tofurther
strengthenthemasteryofthisskill,successfulfeedbackandpleasantexperienceareneeded.
3.What (1)Headstealdisplay(HMD)(HICVivePro);(2)Vivewirelesssuite;(3)Vive Routinetrainingequipment,lowerlimbtraining
materials locator,whichsensestheaccuratepositionandmotionofsubjectsbyusing treadmill,rehabilitationtrainingbicycle
SteamVRtrackingtechnology,g-sensorcorrection,gyroscope,proximitydis-
tancesensor,andpupildistancesensor;(4)twooperatinghandles;(5)com-
puterconfiguration;(6)VRlowerlimbgaittrainingscenariosforpatientsto
choosefrom(nine-gridtraining,single-plankbridgetraining,climbingstairs
training,andcrossbartraining)
4. TheVRtraininggroupwillreceive(1)30minperdayfor3weeks(5days/ Thenon-VRtraininggroupreceives(1)30minperday
Procedures week)ofVR-assistedgaitrehabilitationtraining. for3weeks(5days/week)offunctionalgaitrehabilita-
SpecificprocessofVRtraining:patientswearHTCVivevirtualglassesonthe tiontraining(standingbalancetraining,separation
opengroundandaresynchronouslyequippedwithdifferentscenessuchas promotingexercise,centerofgravitytraining,body
nine-gridtraining,single-plankbridgetraining,climbingstairstraining,and positionchangetraining,stepseparationtraining,par-
crossbartraining.VRscenesareimmersive.Patientsareplacedinvirtual allelbarwalkingtraining).
scenesandreceivecorrespondingscoresaftercompletingtasksaccordingto (2)30minperdayfor3weeks(5days/week)ofregular
thetrainingrequirementsofdifferentscenes. activeexercisetraining(unarmeddrafting,muscle
(2)30minperdayfor3weeks(5days/week)ofregularactiveexercisetraining strengthtraining,trunkbalance,transfer).
(unarmeddrafting,musclestrengthtraining,trunkbalance,transfer).
5.Who Theinterventionmeasuresofthetwogroupsinthisstudywerecarriedoutbyrehabilitationtherapistswithover3yearsofexperience.
provided Interventionmeasuresweredevelopedbyexperimentalresearchers.
6.How Bothinterventionsinthisstudywillbeconductedinone-on-onetrainingsessionsdaily.
7.Where TheinterventionwillbecarriedoutintheinpatientwardoftheDepartmentofNeurologyoftheunionhospitalaffiliatedwithFujian
MedicalUniversity.
8.Whenand During3weeksofrehabilitationtraining,bothgroupswillreceivetraininglasting30min/dayand5days/weekfor3weeks.The
howmuch intensitywasadjustedimmediatelyaccordingtothegaitfunctionofpatients’lowerlimbs.
9.Tailoring Theinterventionofthetwogroupscanbeadjustedaccordingtothegaitfunctionofpatients.Beforetraining,therapistswillmakea
simpleandrapidassessmentofthelowerlimbfunctionofpatientstoselectthepersonalizedinterventionintensitysuitablefor
patients.Itcanalsobeadjustedaccordingtopatients’ownpreferences.
11.How Evaluatorsoverseeinginterventionresultswillbeblindedtothegroupallocationprocessandrandomizationresultstoensurethe
well objectivityandimpartialityoftheevaluationresults.
training. The specific process of VR training included The virtual training scenes can be switched according to
the following: subjects will train on flat ground in an the needs and preferences of the participants. The train-
area of about 2m×2m. Subjects will wear HTC Vive ing difficulty of the VR scene can also be adjusted ac-
virtual glasses [26] with their feet bound with a handle cording to the participants’ lower extremity motor
to replace the feet of subjects in the virtual scenario. ability, allowing personalization of the VR experience.
Four VR training scenes (nine-grid training, single-plank They also will receive 30min per week for 3weeks of
bridge training, climbing stairs training, and crossbar regular active exercise training. Regular active exercise
training) will be available for subjects to choose from. training will include unarmed drafting, muscle strength
Participants will be instructed to select various options training,trunkbalance,andtransfer.
in the virtual scene by the eye gaze method (when sub-
jects stare at an option in the scene for a certain period
of time, that option is selected). The VR scene is immer- Non-VRtraininggroup
sive,givingthesubjectarealistic feeling. Thesubjectwill Participants were randomly assigned to a non-VR train-
be able to turn their head to observe the surrounding ing group. They will receive 30min per day for 3weeks
environment, including looking down to see their mov- (5days/week) of functional gait rehabilitation training.
ing feet on the ground. The participants will be placed The functional gait rehabilitation training may include
in the virtual scene, and within 30min, they will receive standingbalancetraining,separationpromotingexercise,
corresponding training scores according to task comple- center of gravity training, body position change training,
tion requirements set forth for different training scenes. step separation training, and parallel bar walking
Caietal.Trials (2021) 22:91 Page6of11
Fig.3Virtualreality(VR)systemandvirtualscene.aAparticipantwearsavirtualrealitysystem.bAparticipantiscarryingoutcrossbartraining
training. They also will receive 30min per week for 3 and again at a 6-month follow-up. A summary of all
weeksofregularactiveexercisetraining. measurementsinthistrial isshown inTable 2.
Primaryoutcomes
Outcomemeasures
All participants in the study will be measured before the Time “up & go” test (TUGT) The time “up & go” test
start of the study, after the intervention (3weeks later), is a rapid quantitative assessment of functional walking
Caietal.Trials (2021) 22:91 Page7of11
Fig.4Fourvirtualrealitytrainingscenes.aNine-gridtraining:participantscanscorepointsbytramplingonthebluegrid,andthecolorchange
speedofthegridcanbeadjusted.bSingle-plankbridgetraining:participantscanscorepointswhentheywalktotheendofasingle-plank
bridge;theplankspacingofthebridgeisadjustable.cClimbingstairstraining:participantscanscorepointsforsuccessfulmountaineeringto
voiceprompts.dCrossbartraining:participantscanscorepointswhentheycrossthebar;theheightofthebarisadjustable
ability. Studies have confirmed that the TUGT is a reli- on the following criteria:1 point: normal, 2 points: very
able, effective, and easy to operate clinical tool for asses- slight abnormality, 3 points: mild abnormality, 4 points:
sing advanced functional range of the activity after stroke moderateabnormality,and5points:severeabnormality.
[27].IthasalsobeenreportedthattheTUGThasabetter
correlation with stroke patients’ balance function, motor Secondaryoutcomes
function, and ability of daily life activity. The test also
boasts high sensitivity in predicting the risk of falls and MMT muscle strength (lower limbs) The muscle
daily self-care ability of patients. In addition to recording strength grading standard is divided into 0–5 levels [28]:
the time taken, gait and risk of falling will be rated based eachlevel canbefurthersubdividedby“+/−”.
Table2Outcomedomainsandmeasurementinstruments
Outcomedomain Measurementinstrument Abbreviation T0 T1 T2
Primaryoutcomes
Functionalwalkingability Time“up&go”test TUGT × × ×
Secondaryoutcomes
MMTstrength MMTmusclestrengthgradingstandard MMT × × ×
Motorfunctionoflowerlimbs Fugl-Meyerscale FMA × × ×
Motorfunction Motorfunctionassessmentscale MAS × × ×
Abilityofdailylifeactivities ImprovedBarthelindexscale ADL × × ×
Kinematicparametersofgait Stepwithmaximumkneeangle × × ×
Timeparameters Totalsupporttime,stepfrequency × × ×
Distanceparameters Steplength,pace,stridelength × × ×
T0baseline,T1post-intervention(3weeks),T2follow-up(6monthspostintervention)
Caietal.Trials (2021) 22:91 Page8of11
Level 0:unknownmusclecontraction; Samplesizecalculation
Level 1:slight contraction,butnojointmovement; The sample size calculations are based on the primary
Level 2: in the state of weight reduction, the whole outcomemeasure,theTUGTscale[35].Itwasestimated
rangeofjoints canbeoperated; that a sample of 28 participants (14 per group) would
Level 3: can resist the full range of joint motion under provide 80% power (α =0.05, β =0.2) to detect a differ-
heavy force,but cannot resisttheresistance; ence between group means of 3.16. A difference of 3.16
Level 4: can resist gravity and certain resistance move- points on the TUGT scale is regarded as minimum de-
ment; and tectible change [36] using the program PASS, which
Level 5:anti-gravity andanti-fullresistance exercise. takes into account the number of sample groups and the
Used unarmed muscle strength test to grade limb number of evaluation measures. To reach this total
muscle strengthofstroke patients. number ofindividuals, atleast36individuals mustbere-
cruited,allowing adropoutrate of20%.
Lower extremity of the Fugl-Meyer scale Fugl-Meyer
is a carefully designed, feasible, and effective evaluation Statisticalanalysis
SPSS statistical software will be used to build and
methodwhich hasbeen widelyusedinthe assessment of
recovery of stroke patients. The Fugl-Meyer exercise process all data collected. Paired t tests will be used to
evaluate the differences between group rehabilitation
scale is highly recommended as a clinical and research
metrics before and after rehabilitation training. An inde-
tool for assessing changes in exercise injury after stroke
[29]. As a rating scale for motor function recovery in pendent sample t test will be used for measurement data
between the groups. P <0.05 is considered as the stand-
stroke patients, its reliability, validity, and reactivity have
ard for significant difference. In addition, covariance
been confirmed and widely accepted [30]. The Fugl-
Meyer rating scale evaluates the motor function of the analysis will be performed to adjust for any significant
demographic or clinical imbalances. A safety analysis is
lower limbs through reflex activity, joint motor function,
scheduled after randomization and active treatment of
gaitcoordinationability andspeed,etc.
18 patients. Exploratory subgroup analyses may be con-
ducted. To prevent data loss, all questionnaires will be
Motor assessment scale (MAS) of the lower extremity
user-friendly and collected electronically, with all study
of strokepatients Many studies have demonstrated that
personnel trained to identify and engage subjects most
MAS is a reliable and effective tool for measuring motor
likely todropout ofsubsequent evaluations.
function of stroke patients by exploring its reliability,
validity,andfactor structure[31,32].
Studyorganization
This study will be organized and coordinated by re-
Improved Barthel index scale Strongevidence hassup-
searchers at the Department of Neurology of the union
ported the Barthel index as a reliable measure of basic
hospital affiliated with Fujian Medical University. Re-
life activity ability after stroke [33, 34]. This table is used
search staff will also oversee VR scene design and execu-
to evaluate the ability of daily living activities (ADL),
tion ofclinicallyrelatedexperiments.
which is one of the characteristics and commonly used
scales in rehabilitation medicine. The evaluation is based
Studyoversightandparticipantconfidentiality
on the actual daily performance of patients, rather than
The supervision of the project will be carried out by the
the possible abilities of patients. Scores range from 0 to
safety supervision committee of the hospital, which is
20: very severe dysfunction, 25 to 45 points=severe dys-
mainlyresponsiblefortheevaluationoftheexperimental
function, 50 to 70=moderate functional impairment, 75
design,thescientificandexperimentalprocess,thesafety
to 95 points=mild functional impairment, and 100
ofparticipants,adherenceto medical ethics,and thecor-
points=ADLself-care.
rect managementandprocessing ofdata.
The privacy rights of each subject will be respected.
Parameters of gait kinematics The maximum knee All initial data and outcome indicators of participants
joint angle of the step phase, time parameters (including willbekeptinahighly secured database andanonymous
total support time and step frequency), and distance pa- work will be done to ensure the safety and rights of each
rameters (including step length, step speed, stride length subject.
and variation coefficient, etc.). The kinematics parame-
ters of gait will be observed through three-dimensional Safety
gait analysis. A gait analyzer (MA10 System, GYENNO, VR is an emerging technology and its related products
Shenzhen, China) will be used to analyze the gait kine- have been gradually developed in recent years. To date,
matics parametersofthe twogroups. no relevant adverse events have been reported. In the
Caietal.Trials (2021) 22:91 Page9of11
process of training subjects’ gait recovery with VR tech- 5. Conduct debuggingofVRequipmentand gait
nology;ourresearchteamwillstrictlyfollow therelevant analyzer (data analysis equipment)soastoachieve
regulations of the medical ethics committee to ensure theoptimal runningstateoftheequipment.
the maximum safety and ethical protection of subjects.
As VR technology is a relatively new technology, sub- Others
jects may not be able to complete training tasks due to The steering committee consists of the authors Huihui
ineptness or intolerance (such as dizziness, nausea, sore Cai, Tao Lin, Lina Chen, Huidan Weng, Ruihan Zhu,
eyes, disorientation) during training. Adverse events Ying Chen, and Guoen Cai. All members are independ-
(e.g., falls, pain, and dizziness) that occur during the ent of the sponsor. The committee members participate
study period, whether or not related to the study inter- in designing the study and supporting the on-going trial
vention are registered. Considering the above two as- with advice. There is a data safety monitoring board
pects, we will take the following measures to achieve the which is independent of the sponsor, including statisti-
besttrainingenvironment: cians and a chairman who is Prof. Qinyong Ye. An audit
may be performed by the medical supervision and man-
1. Duringthe 3-week training,astricttrainingplan agement department to evaluate clinical study conduct
willbemadeforeach subject onaweeklybasis, and compliance with the protocol, SOPs, GCP, and the
adjusting thetrainingscheduleaccordingtotheac- applicableregulatoryrequirements.
tualconditionsofthesubjects;
2. Payclose attention tothefeedbackand fitnessof Protocolamendments
subjectsusingVRtechnologyforrehabilitation We will discuss the protocol amendments in the Scien-
training; tific Board and notify the sponsor and funder first. A
3. Periodicallyevaluatethe interventioneffectof copy of the revised protocol will be sent to the PI. Any
subjectsusingVRtechnologyforrehabilitation deviations from the protocol will be fully documented
training;and usingabreachreportform.
4. Supporting subjects’decisiontowithdraw fromthe
study. Disseminationplans
The datasets analyzed during the current studyare avail-
This study will strictly comply with the require- able from the corresponding author on reasonable re-
ments of clinical operation guidelines and internation- quest. Trial data and results will be published in
ally recognized legal requirements. Any adverse events scientific journals. The consent form and trial informa-
will be reported directly to the ethics committee im- tion materials are available from the corresponding au-
mediately, and the training regimen will be adjusted thor onrequest.
accordingly after each adverse event. There is no an-
ticipated harm and compensation for trial Discussion
participation. In this study, the effects of immersive VR technology on
gait rehabilitation of stroke patients will be evaluated
after 3weeks of intervention and at a 6-month follow-
Qualitycontrolandqualityassurance up. The improvement of traditional gait-disorder re-
Before thestartofthestudy, inordertoensurethequal- habilitation for stroke patients is required as the trad-
ity of the research, we will strictly review the recruited itional method is time- and resource-consuming and
doctors, rehabilitation therapists, evaluators, and VR relatively one-dimensional with regard to the patient ex-
equipment, andtakethefollowingspecific measures: perience. The effectiveness and feasibility of the newly
developed VR technology in rehabilitation training could
1. Therecruited doctorsshouldfullyunderstandthe providekeysolutionstotheselimitations. Themainpur-
experimentalprocess; pose of the proposed study protocol is to establish an
2. Traintherapiststo carryoutVR-assisted rehabilita- immersive VR gait rehabilitation training experience and
tiontrainingofsubjectsand howtodealwith po- comparatively evaluate outcomes in a controlled, ran-
tentialadverseeventsduringthe training; domizedexperiment.
3. Trainevaluatorshowtoappropriatelymanage and VR technology leverages interactive simulations to cre-
processoutcomeindicators; ate an environment that is similar to the real-world sce-
4. Amongthe 38subjectsincluded,thedata ofthe narios. Stroke patients can complete tasks as required
subjectswhofinally completedallthe training and interact with virtual objects. Previous studies have
programsshallbeanalyzedforcompletenessand pointed out that such human-computer interactions
quality;and should be easy to adapt, be intuitive and convenient to
Caietal.Trials (2021) 22:91 Page10of11
use, and allow the subjects to readily transfer the skills Funding
learned in the virtual environment to real life. In ThisresearchissupportedbygrantsfromtheFujianProvincialScienceand
TechnologyGuidingProject(No.2018Y0033).Thefundingagencyprovides
addition, VR can provide immediate motor feedback
fundingonlyanddoesnotparticipateintheexperimentalprocess.
during training, allowing for task-oriented repetitive ex-
ercises while enabling changes to the traditional treat- Availabilityofdataandmaterials
Studydatacanbeprovidedonrequest.Forinterestedresearchers,please
ment patterns which can feel repetitive or boring for
contactDr.Cai.
patients. In the form of a virtual game, the treatment of
patients with lively and interesting scenes and training Ethicsapprovalandconsenttoparticipate
projects allows patients to feel more relaxed, engaged, TheexperimentwasapprovedbytheethicscommitteeofFujianMedical
UniversityUnionHospital.Ethicalapprovalnumber:2018KY076.
and therefore more invested in the active participation.
Oralconsentandinformedconsentwereobtainedbeforetheexperiment.If
The real-time feedback can additionally provide patients necessary,theinformedconsentofthesubject’sfamilyshouldbeobtained.
with a greater awareness of their training and perform-
Consentforpublication
ance [37]. In addition to repetitive training, the modula-
Alltheauthorsapprovedthefinalmanuscriptandagreedtopublishit.All
tion of different environments during a VR-assisted participantsagreedtopublishimagesassociatedwiththem.
training session can also be very helpful for patients’
learning ability, whichcan enhance the ability ofpatients Competinginterests
Theauthorsstatethattheyhavenocompetinginterests.
to adapt to the environment and thus improve their
sports learning ability [3, 38]. This mode of higher par- Authordetails
ticipation canultimatelyimprovetheenthusiasmandac-
1DepartmentofNeurology,FujianMedicalUniversityUnionHospital,Institute
ofClinicalNeurology,FujianMedicalUniversity,Fuzhou350001,Fujian,
ceptance of training for patients, reducing the dropout China.2DepartmentofClinicalMedicine,FujianMedicalUniversity,Fuzhou
rate and enabling patients to maintain long-term re- 350001,Fujian,China.
habilitation [39]. Moreover, studies have shown that im-
Received:15February2020Accepted:7January2021
mersive VR is feasible in the rehabilitation of stroke
patients with gait disorder [20]. Interestingly, one study
has found that subjects receiving occasional intermittent References
1. LanghorneP,BernhardtJ,KwakkelGJL.Strokerehabilitation.Lancet.2011;
treatment were more effectively impacted than others 377(9778):1693–702.
receivingdailytreatment[40]. 2. ChoiJ,HanE,KimB,KimS,ImS,LeeS,CJAormH.Effectivenessof
commercialgaming-basedvirtualrealitymovementtherapyonfunctional
recoveryofupperextremityinsubacutestrokepatients.AnnRehabilMed.
Trial status
2014;38(4):485–93.
3. deRooijI,vandePortI,JJPtM.Effectofvirtualrealitytrainingonbalance
The study is actively recruiting participants. The end of
andgaitabilityinpatientswithstroke:systematicreviewandmeta-analysis.
thetrial phase andsubsequentdata analysis areexpected PhysTher.2016;96(12):1905–18.
to be completed within 24 to 36months. The protocol 4. VanbellingenT,FiliusS,NyffelerT,EJFinvanW.Usabilityofvideogame-
baseddexteritytrainingintheearlyrehabilitationphaseofstrokepatients:a
version number is 4.0. Recruitment started on December
pilotstudy.FrontNeurol.2017;8:654.
1,2019,andwillclose onDecember1,2022. 5. OlneySJ,GriffinMP,MongaTN,McBrideID.Workandpoweringaitof
strokepatients.ArchPhysMedRehabil.1991;72:309–14.
6. DeutschJ,AJTisrM.Virtualreality-basedapproachestoenablewalkingfor
Supplementary Information
peoplepoststroke.TopStrokeRehabil.2007;14(6):45–53.
7. FungJ,RichardsCL,MalouinF,McFadyenBJ,LamontagneA.Atreadmill
Theonlineversioncontainssupplementarymaterialavailableathttps://doi.
andmotioncoupledvirtualrealitysystemforgaittrainingpost-stroke.
org/10.1186/s13063-021-05031-z. CyberpsycholBehav.2006;9:157–62.
8. MoreiraM,deAmorimLimaA,FerrazK,BenedettiRodriguesMJD.
Additionalfile1.SPIRITchecklist.Thetableidentifiesthepagenumber technologyrA:useofvirtualrealityingaitrecoveryamongpoststroke
fortherelevantcontent. patients–asystematicliteraturereview.DisabilRehabilAssistTechnol.2013;
8(5):357–62.
9. MassettiT,FáveroF,MenezesL,AlvarezM,CrocettaT,GuarnieriR,NunesF,
MonteiroC,TJGfhjS.Achievementofvirtualandrealobjectsusingashort-
Abbreviations
VR:Virtualreality;TUGT:Time“up&go”test;MAS:Motorassessmentscale; termmotorlearningprotocolinpeoplewithDuchennemuscular
dystrophy:acrossoverrandomizedcontrolledtrial.GamesHealthJ.2018;
HMD:Helmetdisplay;ADL:Theabilityofdailylivingactivities
7(2):107–15.
10. JiE,SJJoptsL.Effectsofvirtualrealitytrainingwithmodifiedconstraint-
Acknowledgements inducedmovementtherapyonupperextremityfunctioninacutestage
Theauthorsthankallparticipantsinthisstudy.
stroke:apreliminarystudy.JPhysTherSci.2016;28(11):3168–72.
11. RivaGJM.Applicationsofvirtualenvironmentsinmedicine.MethodsInf
Med.2003;42(5):524–34.
Authors’contributions 12. Luque-MorenoC,Ferragut-GarcíasA,Rodríguez-BlancoC,Heredia-RizoA,
HHC,TL,andLNCwereinvolvedintheconceptionanddesignofthe Oliva-Pascual-VacaJ,KiperP,Oliva-Pascual-VacaÁJB.Adecadeofprogress
research.HDWandRHZobtainedethicsapproval.YCandGECdraftedthe usingvirtualrealityforpoststrokelowerextremityrehabilitation:systematic
manuscriptandparticipatedinthestatisticalanalysisplan.Allauthorsedited reviewoftheinterventionmethods.BiomedResInt.2015;2015:342529.
andrevisedthemanuscript.Allauthorsapprovedthefinalversionofthe 13. GibbonsE,ThomsonA,deNoronhaM,JosephSJT.Arevirtualreality
manuscript.HuihuiCaiandTaoLinareco-firstauthors. technologieseffectiveinimprovinglowerlimboutcomesforpatients
Caietal.Trials (2021) 22:91 Page11of11
followingstroke-asystematicreviewwithmeta-analysis.TopStroke 36. BoissoneaultC,GrimesT,RoseD,WatersM,KhannaA,DattaS,DalyJJB.
Rehabil.2016;23(6):440–57. Innovativelong-doseneurorehabilitationforbalanceandmobilityin
14. IruthayarajahJ,McIntyreA,CotoiA,MacalusoS,TeasellRJT.Theuseof chronicstroke:apreliminarycaseseries.BrainSci.2020;10(8).
virtualrealityforbalanceamongindividualswithchronicstroke:a 37. HoldenMJC,behavior:theimpactoftheinternetm,behaviorvro,society:
systematicreviewandmeta-analysis.TopStrokeRehabil.2017;24(1):68–79. Virtualenvironmentsformotorrehabilitation:review.CyberpsycholBehav.
15. LohreR,BoisAJ,AthwalGS,GoelDP,CanadianShoulderandElbowSociety 2005;8(3):187–211;discussion212-189.
(CSES).Improvedcomplexskillacquisitionbyimmersivevirtualreality 38. LaverK,LangeB,GeorgeS,DeutschJ,SaposnikG,CrottyMJTC.Virtual
training:arandomizedcontrolledtrial.JBoneJointSurgAm.2020;102(6): realityforstrokerehabilitation.CochraneDatabaseSystRev.2017;11:
e26. CD008349.
16. ÖgünMN,KurulR,YaşarMF,TurkogluSA,AvciŞ,YildizN.Effectofleap 39. BergmannJ,KrewerC,BauerP,KoenigA,RienerR,MüllerFJEjop,medicine
motion-based3Dimmersivevirtualrealityusageonupperextremity r:Virtualrealitytoaugmentrobot-assistedgaittraininginnon-ambulatory
functioninischemicstrokepatients.ArqNeuropsiquiatr.2019;77:681–8. patientswithasubacutestroke:apilotrandomizedcontrolledtrial.407.Eur
17. SolcàM,RonchiR,Bello-RuizJ,SchmidlinT,HerbelinB,LuthiF,etal. JPhysRehabilMed.2018;54(3):397–407.
Heartbeat-enhancedimmersivevirtualrealitytotreatcomplexregionalpain 40. LeeH,ParkY.ParkSJBri:Theeffectsofvirtualrealitytrainingonfunctionin
syndrome.Neurology.2018;91:e479–479e489. chronicstrokepatients:asystematicreviewandmeta-analysis.BiomedRes
18. ChoDR,LeeSH.Effectsofvirtualrealityimmersivetrainingwith Int.2019;2019:7595639.
computerizedcognitivetrainingoncognitivefunctionandactivitiesofdaily
livingperformanceinpatientswithacutestagestroke:apreliminary Publisher’s Note
randomizedcontrolledtrial.Medicine(Baltimore).2019;98:e14752.
SpringerNatureremainsneutralwithregardtojurisdictionalclaimsin
19. BiffiE,BerettaE,CesareoA,MaghiniC,TurconiA,ReniG,StrazzerSJM.An
publishedmapsandinstitutionalaffiliations.
immersivevirtualrealityplatformtoenhancewalkingabilityofchildren
withacquiredbraininjuries.MethodsInfMed.2017;56(2):119–26.
20. Cortés-PérezI,Nieto-EscamezFA,Obrero-GaitánE.Immersivevirtualreality
instrokepatientsasanewapproachforreducingposturaldisabilitiesand
fallsrisk:acaseseries.BrainSci.2020;10.
21. EggerJ,GallM,WallnerJ,BoechatP,HannA,LiX,ChenX,SchmalstiegDJP.
HTCViveMeVisLabintegrationviaOpenVRformedicalapplications.PLoS
One.2017;12(3):e0173972.
22. NiehorsterD,LiL,LappeMJ-P.Theaccuracyandprecisionofpositionand
orientationtrackingintheHTCvivevirtualrealitysystemforscientific
research.Iperception.2017;8(3):2041669517708205.
23. ArboixA,Alvarez-SabínJ,SolerLJN.Stroke.Classificationanddiagnostic
criteria.AdhocEditorialCommitteeoftheTaskForceonCerebrovascular
DiseasesofSEN.Neurologia.1998:3–10.
24. HoffmannT,GlasziouP,BoutronI,MilneR,PereraR,MoherD,AltmanD,
BarbourV,MacdonaldH,JohnstonM,etal.Betterreportingof
interventions:templateforinterventiondescriptionandreplication(TIDieR)
checklistandguide.Gesundheitswesen.2016;78(3):e174.
25. LiepertJ,BauderH,WolfgangH,MiltnerW,TaubE,WeillerCJS.Treatment-
inducedcorticalreorganizationafterstrokeinhumans.Stroke.2000;31(6):
1210–6.
26. PerskyS,LewisMJT.Advancingscienceandpracticeusingimmersivevirtual
reality:whatbehavioralmedicinehastooffer.TranslBehavMed.2019;9(6):
1040–6.
27. ChanP,SiTouJ,TseM,NgSJA.Rehabilitation:reliabilityandvalidityofthe
timedupandgotestwithamotortaskinpeoplewithchronicstroke.Arch
PhysMedRehabil.2017;98(11):2213–20.
28. SeederL.Musclestrengthgrading.AnnEmergMed.1983;12(6):407.
29. GladstoneDJ,DanellsCJ,BlackSE.TheFugl-Meyerassessmentofmotor
recoveryafterstroke:acriticalreviewofitsmeasurementproperties.
NeurorehabilNeuralRepair.2002;16(3):232-40.
30. HsuehI,HsuM,SheuC,LeeS,HsiehC,LinJJN.repairn:Psychometric
comparisonsof2versionsoftheFugl-MeyerMotorScaleand2versionsof
theStrokeRehabilitationAssessmentofMovement.NeurorehabilNeural
Repair.2008;22(6):737–44.
31. AamodtG,KjendahlA,JahnsenRJD.rehabilitation:Dimensionalityand
scalabilityoftheMotorAssessmentScale(MAS).DisabilRehabil.2006;28(16):
1007–13.
32. LanninNJD.rehabilitation:Reliability,validityandfactorstructureofthe
upperlimbsubscaleoftheMotorAssessmentScale(UL-MAS)inadults
followingstroke.DisabilRehabil.2004;26(2):109–16.
33. GreenJ,ForsterA,YoungJJD.rehabilitation:Atest-retestreliabilitystudyof
theBarthelIndex,theRivermeadMobilityIndex,theNottinghamExtended
ActivitiesofDailyLivingScaleandtheFrenchayActivitiesIndexinstroke
patients.DisabilRehabil.2001;23(15):670–6.
34. HuybrechtsK.CaroJJCmr,opinion:TheBarthelIndexandmodifiedRankin
Scaleasprognostictoolsforlong-termoutcomesafterstroke:aqualitative
reviewoftheliterature.CurrMedResOpin.2007;23(7):1627–36.
35. InT,LeeK.SongCJMsmimjoe,researchc:Virtualrealityreflectiontherapy
improvesbalanceandgaitinpatientswithchronicstroke:randomized
controlledtrials.MedSciMonit.2016;22:4046–53.