Abstracts
4CPS-210 PHARMACISTS’COMMUNICATIONWITHFOREIGN enzalutamide increase survival and therefore it is important to
LANGUAGESPEAKINGPATIENTSINAFOREIGNER assess adherence and interactions of these treatments.
SETTLEMENTAREA,JAPAN Aim and objectives Our objective was to determine adherence
to abiraterone or enzalutamida and interactions in patients
1ETakahashi*,2YTakahashi,3HSato,1KObayashi,4YTakechi,5KTakahashi.1Takasaki
UniversityofHealthandWelfare,FacultyofPharmacy,Takasaki-Gunma,Japan;2Pharma with castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC).
MiraiCoLtd,Kyoso-MiraiKakezukaPharmacy,Isesaki-Gunma,Japan;3HoshinoPharmacy, Material and methods This retrospective observational study
Tsunatori Branch, Isesaki-Gunma, Japan; 4Gunma Pharmaceutical Association, Gunma included patients with CRPC receiving abiraterone or enzaluta-
PharmaceuticalAssociation,Maebashi-Gunma,Japan;5TeikyoUniversityGraduateSchoolof mide for at least 4 months. Demographic data were obtained
PublicHealth,DepartmentofGlobalCommunityHealth,Itabashi-Tokyo,Japan from the computerised medical history. Adherence was meas-
ured by combining the Morisky–Green questionnaire and the
10.1136/ejhpharm-2020-eahpconf.311
dispensing record. Search and classification of the interactions
was obtained from Drugs.com
Background and importance Recently, the number of foreign
Results Thirty-seven patients were included, with an average residents has significantly increased in Japan. At the consulta-
age of 74 years (SD 5). The average number of medications
tion with physicians, the foreign language speaking patients
consumed by these patients was 7 (SD 2.5). Comorbidities
(FLSP) often utilise medical interpreter services or ad hoc
averaged 5 per patient. All patients were adherent according
interpreters. However, few studies have reported how such
to the Morisky–Green questionnaire, and combined with the
patients receive information in community pharmacies affili-
dispensing records, adherence to abiraterone was 85% and
ated with hospitals/clinics.
92% to enzalutamida.
Aim and objectives The objective of the study was to examine
Pharmacological interactions were major interactions in
how and what pharmacists communicate with FLSP at pharma-
21% of cases, of which the most frequent was amiodarone
cies, in the Gunma prefecture, one of the most foreign residen-
and abiraterone. Moderate interactions occurred in 65% of
tialprefecturesinJapan.
patients, the most frequent being enzalutamide with lipid low-
Material and methods A self-administered questionnaire survey
ering agents (atorvastatin, simvastatin) and enzalutamide with
was conducted among the pharmacy members of Gunma Phar-
proton pump inhibitors (omeprazole, esomeprazol): 14% of
maceutical Association, in January and February 2018. The
patients had no drug interactions.
contents of the questionnaire were divided into two parts: (1)
pharmacy system targeting the manager; and (2) pharmacists’ Conclusion and relevance In these patients, good adherence to
enzalutamide and abiraterone was found. All interactions clas-
experience and skills. The answers were compared between
sified as major were monitored. All patients with CRPC the foreigner settlement area and the other area.
required pharmaceutical care. Results Of the 773 pharmacies, 372 pharmacies responded.
Approximately 90% of had ever treated FLSP with English
REFERENCES AND/OR ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
and 25 other languages. For the pharmacists’ experiences,
No conflict of interest.
65% of 844 pharmacist participants had some issues with lan-
guage, regularly/often. Multilingual instruction tools were pre-
pared in 18.5% of the pharmacies. Of the pharmacies without
the tools, 54% did not know of the availability of these tools. 4CPS-212 HEALTHCAREPROVIDERS’VIEWSOFPHARMACY
As a means of communication, ‘accompanying acquaintance TEAMINVOLVEMENTINTHEPREPARATIONAND
and family member interpreter’ was used significantly more ADMINISTRATIONOFMEDICINESONINPATIENTS
often in the foreigner settlement area than in the other area. WARDS:ANEXPLORATORYSTUDY
Most common medication instructions for FLSP were: how to 1EMVella*,2ACutajar,1PLewis.1TheUniversityofManchester,SchoolofHealthSciences,
use, how to follow and confirm the effects of the medicines, Manchester,UK;2MaterDeiHospital,DepartmentofPharmacy-ClinicalPharmacyPractice
and how to confirm the side effects of the medicines. All Unit,Msida,Malta
were explained significantly better in the foreigner settlement
area than in the other areas. 10.1136/ejhpharm-2020-eahpconf.313
Conclusion and relevance Regardless of where pharmacies are
BackgroundandimportanceLack of nursing staff, interruptions
located, it is recommended to introduce multilingual instruc-
when preparing and administering medicines, and lack of
tion tools for FLSP.
knowledge can increase the risk of medication errors. The
REFERENCES AND/OR ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS involvement of the pharmacy team in the preparation and
No conflict of interest. administration of medicines on hospital wards has been high-
lighted as an opportunity to provide better guidance and sup-
port to nurses, enhance patient safety and improve service
delivery. However, to date there is no evidence on this devel-
opment in our country.
4CPS-211 ADHERENCEANDINTERACTIONSINPATIENTS
Aim and objectives To explore indepth the views of healthcare
TREATEDWITHABIRATERONEANDENZALUTAMIDE
professionals towards pharmacy team (pharmacists and phar-
1MV Tarazona Casany*, 2P Perez, 2E Monte, 2MJ Cuellar. 1Hospital Pharmacy Hospital macy technicians) involvement in the preparation and adminis-
Universitario Y Politécnico La Fe Valencia Spain, Hospital Pharmacy, Valencia, Spain; tration of medications on inpatient wards in a general
2Hospital Universitario Y Politécnico La Fe Valencia Spain, Hospital Pharmacy, Valencia, hospital.
Spain
Material and methods Semi-structured, one to one interviews
were conducted with a purposive sample of various healthcare
10.1136/ejhpharm-2020-eahpconf.312
professionals from the country’s main general hospital between
Background and importance Prostate cancer is a common February and June 2018. A topic guide was developed to
tumour in elderly men. Treatment with abiraterone and explore the acceptability and extent of involvement, including
EJHP2020;27(Suppl1):A1–A232 A147
Protected
by
copyright,
including
for
uses
related
to
text
and
data
mining,
AI
training,
and
similar
technologies.
Medical
library.
Eur
J
Hosp
Pharm:
first
published
as
10.1136/ejhpharm-2020-eahpconf.311
on
24
March
2020.
Downloaded
from
http://ejhp.bmj.com/
on
March
17,
2026
at
University
of
Oulu