JMIR Preprints Kerr et al
A participatory model for co-creating accessible
rehabilitation technology for stroke survivors
Andrew Kerr, Madeleine Grealy, Milena Slachetka, Chioma Wodu, Gillian
Sweeney, Fiona Boyd, Philip Rowe
Submitted to: JMIR Rehabilitation and Assistive Technologies
on: February 08, 2024
Disclaimer: © The authors. All rights reserved. This is a privileged document currently under peer-review/community
review. Authors have provided JMIR Publications with an exclusive license to publish this preprint on it's website for
review purposes only. While the final peer-reviewed paper may be licensed under a CC BY license on publication, at this
stage authors and publisher expressively prohibit redistribution of this draft paper other than for review purposes.
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/57227 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Kerr et al
Table of Contents
Original Manuscript. ...................................................................................................................................................................... 5
Supplementary Files ..................................................................................................................................................................... 14
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/57227 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Kerr et al
A participatory model for co-creating accessible rehabilitation technology
for stroke survivors
Andrew Kerr1* PhD; Madeleine Grealy2* PhD; Milena Slachetka1* BSc; Chioma Wodu1* BSc; Gillian Sweeney1* PhD;
Fiona Boyd1* MENG; Philip Rowe1* PhD
1Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Strathclyde Glasgow GB
2Department of Psychological Sciences & Health, University of Strathclyde Glasgow GB
*these authors contributed equally
Corresponding Author:
Andrew Kerr PhD
Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Strathclyde
Wolfson Centre, 106 Rottenrow,
University of Strathclyde
Glasgow
GB
Abstract
Background: Globally, one in three people live with health conditions that could be improved with rehabilitation. Ideally this is
provided by trained professionals delivering evidence based levels of dose, intensity and content, for optimal recovery. The
inability of healthcare providers to deliver this, creates an opportunity for technological innovation. Design processes that lack
close consideration of users’ needs and healthcare budgets, however, mean that many rehabilitation technologies are neither
useful, nor used.
Objective: To develop a model for designing accessible rehabilitation technology using a co-creation approach that is informed
by users who have completed, or are completing, an eight-week technology based rehabilitation programme.
Methods: To address this problem our multi-disciplinary research group established a co-creation centre for rehabilitation
technology that places the user at the centre of the innovation process. The core of this model is an eight-week holistic
rehabilitation programme delivered exclusively through commercial and prototype technology so that users are able to provide
truly informed feedback on technologies under development, as well as creating an observatory to better understand how patients
interact with rehabilitation technologies. The process is supported by focus groups for product development and a translation
group advising on broader issues of adoption. As the leading cause of global adult disability, the target population for the centre
has been stroke, however the principles can be applied to any clinical population.
Results: Our model has been active for more than two years with 80/86 individuals completing the programme. Five new
devices have emerged from the process with further ideas logged for future development. In addition, it has led to accessibility
modifications to existing technology, including modifications to hand grips and the structure of rehabilitation games. Critically it
has also produced a set of co-created protocols for technology enriched rehabilitation that has allowed us to replicate the model
on an acute stroke ward.
Conclusions: Sub-optimal rehabilitation limits recovery from health conditions. Technology offers support to increase access to
intensive and enriched rehabilitation, but needs to be designed to suit users and not just their impairment. Our co-creation model,
built around participation in an intensive, technology-based programme, has produced new accessible technology and
demonstrated the feasibility of our overall approach to providing the rehabilitation that people need, for as long as needed.
(JMIR Preprints 08/02/2024:57227)
DOI: https://doi.org/10.2196/preprints.57227
Preprint Settings
1) Would you like to publish your submitted manuscript as preprint?
Please make my preprint PDF available to anyone at any time (recommended).
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/57227 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Kerr et al
Please make my preprint PDF available only to logged-in users; I understand that my title and abstract will remain visible to all users.
Only make the preprint title and abstract visible.
No, I do not wish to publish my submitted manuscript as a preprint.
2) If accepted for publication in a JMIR journal, would you like the PDF to be visible to the public?
Yes, please make my accepted manuscript PDF available to anyone at any time (Recommended).
Yes, but please make my accepted manuscript PDF available only to logged-in users; I understand that the title and abstract will remain visible to all users (see Important note, above). I also understand that if I later pay to participate in <a href="https://jmir.zendesk.com/hc/en-us/articles/360008899632-What-is-the-PubMed-Now-ahead-of-print-option-when-I-pay-the-APF-" target="_blank">JMIR’s PubMed Now! service</a> service, my accepted manuscript PDF will automatically be made openly available.
Yes, but only make the title and abstract visible (see Important note, above). I understand that if I later pay to participate in <a href="https://jmir.zendesk.com/hc/en-us/articles/360008899632-What-is-the-PubMed-Now-ahead-of-print-option-when-I-pay-the-APF-" target="_blank">JMIR’s PubMed Now! service</a> service, my accepted manuscript PDF will automatically be made openly available.
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/57227 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Kerr et al
Original Manuscript
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/57227 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Kerr et al
A participatory model for co-creating accessible
rehabilitation technology for stroke survivors
Kerr, Grealy, Slachetka, Wodu, Sweeney, Boyd, Colville, Rowe
University of Strathclyde
Abstract
Background (360)
Globally, one in three people live with health conditions that could be improved with rehabilitation.
Ideally this is provided by trained professionals delivering evidence based dose, intensity and content
of rehabilitation, for optimal recovery. The widely acknowledged inability of global healthcare
providers to deliver recommended levels of rehabilitation, creates an opportunity for technological
innovation. Design processes that lack close consideration of users’ needs and budgets, however,
mean that many rehabilitation technologies are neither useful, nor used. To address this problem our
multi-disciplinary research group have established a co-creation centre for rehabilitation technology
that places the end user at the centre of the innovation process.
Objective
To present the participatory co-creation model that has developed from our centre and illustrate the
approach with two cases studies.
Methods
The model is built around user participation in an intensive rehabilitation programme (2 hour
sessions, 2-5 times per week, 8 week duration) supervised by qualified therapists but delivered
exclusively through commercial and prototype technology. This provides participants (chronic stroke
survivors with movement and/or speech disability) with a rich experience of rehabilitation
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/57227 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Kerr et al
technology, enabling them to provide truly informed feedback, as well as creating an observatory for
the research team. This process is supported by short-term focus groups for specific product
development and a longer-term advisory group to consider broader issues of adoption and translation
into everyday healthcare.
Results
Our model has been active for three years with 92/100 participants completing the programme. Five
new technologies have evolved from the process with further ideas logged for future development. In
addition, it has led to a set of co-created protocols for technology-enriched rehabilitation, including
recruitment, outcome measures and intervention structure, that has allowed us to replicate this
approach in an acute hospital ward.
Conclusions
Sub-optimal rehabilitation limits recovery from health conditions. Technology offers the potential
support to increase access to recommended levels of rehabilitation, but needs to be designed to suit
end users and not just their impairment. Our co-creation model, built around participation in an
intensive, technology-based programme, has produced new accessible technology and demonstrated
the feasibility of our overall approach to providing the rehabilitation that people need, for as long as
needed.
Introduction
One in three people, across the world, live with a health condition that could benefit from
rehabilitation [1]. Delivering effective levels of rehabilitation to meet this global demand is beyond
the reach of most, if not all, state run health services, not least because of the inadequate workforce
[2, 3]. This means most people will either receive suboptimal rehabilitation or no rehabilitation at all.
Consequently, recovery from disabling conditions like stroke is not simply a function of severity but
will depend on an individual’s capacity to access additional rehabilitation. Technology has reached
the point of maturity where could it help address this large unmet need in an equitable manner.
Rehabilitation technology, such as virtual reality and robotics, have been shown to improve function
across a range of conditions; for example stroke [4] and Parkinson’s [5] as well as age related
disability [6]. Access to this technology, however, has been described as poor, or non-existent, in the
public sector of many countries, including the UK [7].
Besides the initial challenge of access, the subsequent abandonment of prescribed technology
(rehabilitation and assistive) is common, for example Sugawara et al., (2018) [8] reported more than
50% of upper limb prostheses were not used after prescription. Many reasons are given for non-use
of technology in rehabilitation. Sweeney et al., (2020) [7] found reasons from both therapists (e.g.
lack of training) and patients (e.g. poor motivation). To overcome these barriers, and increase the use
of technology in rehabilitation, a number of recommendations have been proposed; including
improved usability, clinical evidence of effectiveness, value for money and conforming to self-
management programmes [9].
These recommendations require the involvement of end users throughout the design process, for the
people in need of rehabilitation to be co-creators of the technology and involve them at different
stages in the development process both as determiners and evaluators of these technologies.
Co-creation is a relatively new approach in health care. The idea originated in marketing and
management [10] driven by the desire for bottom up economics and greater personalisation. The
collaborative approach quickly spread into other domains including healthcare where it has been
used to develop services like rehabilitation [11] and the design of assistive devices [12]. Irrespective
of the field of study, co-creation is the practice of identifying and empowering relevant stakeholders
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/57227 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Kerr et al
(user groups) to collaborate in the process of finding solutions to a problem affecting the group. Its
application in healthcare has been described using different terms such as co-design and co-
production [13]. The common idea behind co-creation is the involvement and partnership between
the researcher/designer and the end-users of the product, services, or intervention in generating
concepts and evaluating products [14] .
While co-creation can address many of the user-based issues identified with rehabilitation
technology (usability, access, adherence) [15] a potential weakness is the imbalance between
designers and users in their knowledge and experience. An imbalance that may be reflected in
outcomes. Users’ knowledge of rehabilitation technology is likely be limited in the range of
technology and their day to day experience of using them as part of a rehabilitation programme. A
participatory approach [16] would allow users to gain the necessary knowledge to make meaningful
contributions to the design process.
In 2021 our research group set up a co-creation centre for rehabilitation technology (CCRT) [17]
aiming to develop accessible rehabilitation using a co-creation approach that is informed by users
who have completed, or are completing, an eight-week technology based rehabilitation programme
[17, 18]. This paper describes the formal and informal co-creation processes that developed from our
centre and presents two cases studies to demonstrate how specific devices have benefited from our
participatory co-creation approach.
Methods
Participants
Details of our research centre (participants, intervention, staff and outcome measures) are provided in
previous publications [17, 18]. In the interests of clarity, they are briefly described here. Participants
living with disabilities caused by stroke (mobility, communication and cognition) are invited to
attend an eight-week rehabilitation programme at the University of Strathclyde. Participants are
recruited through invitations distributed by a medical charity; Chest Heart and Stroke Scotland.
Interested individuals attend an initial meeting to assess eligibility (more than a year since a stroke
diagnosis, well enough, and able, to attend at least twice a week, have physical and/or
communication/cognitive disability resulting from stroke) and record baseline measures. The study
was approved by the University of Strathclyde ethics board (UEC20/08), including the informed
consent process.
Intervention
A goal setting interview and baseline measures of mobility, communication and cognition help our
research therapists (physiotherapist and occupational therapist) to design an intensive personalised
rehabilitation programme. The programmes are delivered exclusively through technology (e.g.
treadmills, power assisted exercise machines, tablet apps, virtual reality, upper limb robots, balance
training systems and functional electrical stimulation) but supervised in small (n=5-10) circuit-based
classes by at least one therapist. Each session is two hours long which participants can attend daily
but must agree to attend at least two sessions a week for the eight-week period. We have called the
programme TERG -Technology Enriched Rehabilitation Gym - to encapsulate training with
technology designed to address the range of impairments resulting from stroke.
Outcome measures
Standard, validated measures of mobility (e.g. Berg Balance Scale and the Ten Metre Walk Test) and
global impact (Stroke Impact Scale) are recorded immediately before and after the programme.
These have been well described in our other publications, including pilot data on outcomes [18].
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/57227 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Kerr et al
Co-creation activities
Our co-creation activities are aimed at either development of specific devices or informing the
strategy for implementing the TERG model into practice. For device development, short term,
purposively selected, focus groups are formed from individuals (n=5 to 8) currently attending the
TERG to provide focussed user feedback on the device. The number of focus groups varies (typically
3-5) and may extend into future groups, in which case individuals are invited to continue
contributing.
Translating, and integrating, our TERG model into everyday rehabilitation practice, is the long term
aim of our centre. To achieve this we have formed a User Advisory Group that meets formally three
times a year and provides feedback on specific plans and ideas around implementation in community
and hospital settings.
The activities described so far represent formal methods of co-creation. The opportunity to observe
and work closely with these heterogeneous users as they carry out their technology based
rehabilitation provides our multi-disciplinary research group (therapists, engineers and scientists)
with a rich dataset of daily informal observations on how users interact with technology and how
this evolves over the course of eight weeks as users learn and improve. These informal observations
are documented in the lab book and reviewed by the team at the end of each group. This more
informal mechanism has arguably provided a greater volume of feedback on devices and led to
several new ideas that are currently being explored. A graphical overview of the whole co-creation
model is presented in figure 1.
Figure 1: Overview of the participatory co-creation process showing the core 8 week and related
focus and user groups
Informal feedback, ideas
To illustrate how the model functions practically we present two case studies in the following
and observation
section.
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/57227 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Kerr et al
Results
Our participatory model of co-creation has been active for almost three years (Sept 2021 until June
2024) with 92 out of 100 recruited participants fully completing the eight-week programme.
Feedback from these individuals has contributed to the design process of five rehabilitation
technologies with further concepts logged for future development. Case studies for two of these
technologies are presented below. Critically, participant feedback, along with data on feasibility
(safety and adherence) and impact on function, has also produced a set of co-created protocols for
technology-enriched rehabilitation, including recruitment, outcome measures and intervention
parameters. This has allowed us to replicate our approach on an acute hospital ward.
Case Study 1: Design of a low-cost hand device for people with
hemiplegia
The aim was to design a technology that could improve hand flexibility, and function, of people with
moderate to high levels of spasticity that was accessible in community settings (low-cost, easy to use
and did not require professional supervision) including low income countries, comfortable and
supported self-management.
The design process followed the UK Design Council’s Double Diamond model [19] which promotes
divergent (creating a range of solutions) and convergent (narrowing solutions down through a set of
criteria) thinking. The model supports a co-creation approach with users (in this case rehabilitation
professionals and stroke survivors) contributing to the discovery and delivery phases of this iterative
design model through observations of technology interactions, focus groups and interviews.
The design process started by observing stroke survivors participating in the TERG model and
engaging them in discussions related to hand rehabilitation. This early discovery phase provided
general design criteria (comfort/ease of use) and important features which were further refined by a
focus group of rehabilitation engineers (n=8) to ensure feasibility in terms of manufacturing. A range
of three potential designs were then presented to two user groups; 1) rehabilitation professionals
(physiotherapists and occupational therapists, n=9) experienced in this area and 2) stroke survivors
(n=6) to reduce this list to a which was most appropriate to solving the problem.
A semi-structured interview (choice of in-person or virtual) was conducted by the researcher (Wodu)
for each participant during which a 3D model of the three concepts was presented to generate
opinions on key attributes (usability, comfort and effectiveness). The interviews were recorded,
transcribed and anonymised. Thematic analysis was then used to identify common themes in the
resulting data and used to reduce the list of devices to a single preferred device that would be built
for further hands on evaluation.
A prototype of the final choice has been tested for feasibility and acceptability by a new group of
stroke survivor attending the centre. The device is currently going through further refinement as part
of a process to prepare it for commercialisation.
Case study 2: Design of a rehabilitation dosage and intensity monitoring
system
This case study aimed to develop a system for monitoring rehabilitation dosage and intensity to
allow stroke survivors and clinicians to gauge activity against the National Clinical Guidelines for
Stroke [20]. The system tracks and logs the dosage and intensity of rehabilitation activities users
partake in throughout their time at the CCRT, thereby supporting users in their recovery process.
Central to its foundation was a co-design process, meticulously planned over a year through four
focus groups. This methodological approach ensured the inclusion of direct feedback from
participants, fostering a rapport that enriched the design process with iterative refinements and
consistent insights.
Analysis from these sessions revealed a notable gap in the transition from prescribed to self-managed
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/57227 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Kerr et al
rehabilitation, often leading to reduced engagement. Yet, it also highlighted a persistent motivation
among individuals to pursue adequate rehabilitation, particularly when supported by peers. This
insight steered the development towards leveraging peer support to bolster self-rehabilitation
motivation. Consequently, the project led to the collaborative design of a system that should not only
facilitate home and community-based stroke rehabilitation but also improve the engagement and
motivation of a person to complete their rehabilitation exercises.
Utilising these insights, the project embarked on the development of a mobile application with
accompanying hardware to support home and community-based stroke rehabilitation. This
development process also employed gamification principles to make said rehabilitation activities
more engaging, with a strong emphasis on social involvement and accessible peer support. Further
on in the design and development process, involving stakeholders from the stroke community,
participants of the co-creation model, healthcare professionals, and researchers, ensured that the
device not only met the unique needs of its users but also aligned with evidence-based rehabilitation
principles.
Discussion
We have described our participatory approach to the co-creation of rehabilitation technology and
presented two case studies to illustrate the process and highlight the potential benefits of this
approach. Our model expands the concept of co-creation beyond surveys, questionnaires and
interviews/focus groups [21]. Contributions from end users are enriched by their participation in an
eight-week, technology-based rehabilitation programme. Feedback is consequently highly informed,
detailed and authentic with the opportunity to compare technologies. This in-depth feedback is
critical for designing technology that is fit for the “real world” [22].
The participatory nature of our model has also created an ideal observatory for engineers (biomedical
and design) to collect data on the interactions between stroke survivors and rehabilitation technology.
This has led to a number of new device concepts being drafted and adjustments to commercial
technology, for example alterations to hand grips and equipment portability which have been
accepted by our industrial partners. A surprising outcome from these observations, and informal
discussions with participants, has been the desire to integrate technology, for example balance and
speech therapy training, and track these activities on a common platform. This is now a focussed area
of our activity.
Case study 1 demonstrates that our co-creation method can complement standard design models like
the UK Design Councils double diamond [23]. Similarly case study 2 followed the MRC framework
for the design of complex medical interventions and devices [24]. Our model ensures the user voice
strongly influences each phase of these innovation frameworks and guidelines and fulfils explicit
requirements to engage stakeholders (MRC framework) and involve users [23].
Limitations
In presenting this model we recognise there are some limitations. Firstly the volunteers attending our
centre may be more motivated and generally more positive towards rehabilitation than the average
stroke survivor, since they have actively sought the opportunity for more rehabilitation. Their
opinions may therefore be biased and not entirely generalisable. To address this potential bias we
have recently started a version of our centre in a hospital setting where all eligible stroke patients are
offered the opportunity to experience technology enriched rehabilitation.
The process may also raise issues around intellectual property since a number of people contribute to
technology development. This requires the involvement of an experienced research office and a legal
framework that recognises and protects different contributions.
Finally, we recognise that our model is not be implementable in most engineering depts and
industrial settings due to a lack of resource (equipment and therapy staff). This places greater
importance on the need for collaboration across the rehabilitation engineering sector.
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/57227 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Kerr et al
Conclusion
There is an urgent need to develop rehabilitation technology that is fit for purpose and capable of
supporting the recommended levels of rehabilitation. Our multidisciplinary group has developed a
model of co-creation where stroke survivors with related disabilities participate in a technology
enriched rehabilitation programme that captures meaningful feedback and contributions from end-
users on specific device development, including new concepts, as well as developing a model that
can be widely adopted in everyday practice. We have presented this novel model for developing
rehabilitation technology for discussion and included two illustrative case studies.
References
1. Cieza, A., et al., Global estimates of the need for rehabilitation based on the Global Burden of
Disease study 2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019.
Lancet, 2021. 396(10267): p. 2006-2017.
2. Gupta, N., C. Castillo-Laborde, and M.D. Landry, Health-related rehabilitation services:
assessing the global supply of and need for human resources. BMC Health Serv Res, 2011.
11: p. 276.
3. Gimigliano, F., et al., The World Health Organization "Rehabilitation 2030: a call for action".
2017.
4. Wu, J., et al., Robot-Assisted Therapy for Upper Extremity Motor Impairment After Stroke: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Phys Ther, 2021. 101(4).
5. Kwon, S.H., J.K. Park, and Y.H. Koh, A systematic review and meta-analysis on the effect of
virtual reality-based rehabilitation for people with Parkinson's disease. J Neuroeng Rehabil,
2023. 20(1): p. 94.
6. Mitzner, T.L., J.A. Sanford, and W.A. Rogers, Closing the Capacity-Ability Gap: Using
Technology to Support Aging With Disability. Innov Aging, 2018. 2(1): p. igy008.
7. Sweeney, G., M. Barber, and A. Kerr, Exploration of barriers and enablers for evidence-based
interventions for upper limb rehabilitation following a stroke: Use of Constraint Induced
Movement Therapy and Robot Assisted Therapy in NHS Scotland. British Journal of
Occupational Therapy, 2020. 83(11): p. 690-700.
8. Sugawara, A.T., et al., Abandonment of assistive products: assessing abandonment levels and
factors that impact on it. Disability and Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology, 2018. 13(7): p.
716-723.
9. Kerr, A., et al., Adoption of Stroke Rehabilitation Technologies by the User Community:
Qualitative Study. JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol, 2018. 5(2): p. e15.
10. Prahalad, C.K., The future of competition: Co-creating unique value with customers.
Research-Technology Management, 2004. 47(3): p. 62-62.
11. Dobe, J., et al., Co-creation and stroke rehabilitation: a scoping review. 2023.
12. Lamontagne, M., et al., The REHAB-LAB model for individualized assistive device co-creation
and production. 2024.
13. Palmer, V.J., et al., The Participatory Zeitgeist: an explanatory theoretical model of change in
an era of coproduction and codesign in healthcare improvement. Medical humanities, 2018.
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/57227 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Kerr et al
14. Ogrin, R., et al., Co‐creation of services to maintain independence and optimise well‐being:
learnings from Australia’s Older Women Living Alone (OWLA) project. Health & social care in
the community, 2020. 28(2): p. 494-504.
15. Dobe, J., L. Gustafsson, and K. Walder, Co-creation and stroke rehabilitation: A scoping
review. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2023. 45(3): p. 562-574.
16. Leask, C.F., et al., Framework, principles and recommendations for utilising participatory
methodologies in the co-creation and evaluation of public health interventions. Res Involv
Engagem, 2019. 5: p. 2.
17. Kerr, A., et al., A Co-creation Centre for Accessible Rehabilitation Technology. Front Rehabil
Sci, 2021. 2: p. 820929.
18. Kerr, A., et al., An Intensive Exercise Program Using a Technology-Enriched Rehabilitation
Gym for the Recovery of Function in People With Chronic Stroke: Usability Study. JMIR
Rehabil Assist Technol, 2023. 10: p. e46619.
19. Council, U.D., Eleven lessons: managing design in eleven global brands. A study of the design
process. Design Council. 2005.
20. Excellence, N.I.f.H.a.C., National Clinical Guideline for Stroke, S.S.N.A.P. (SSNAP), Editor. 2023,
Sentinel Stroke National Audit Programme (SSNAP).
21. Karahasanović, A., et al., Co-creation and user-generated content–elderly people’s user
requirements. Computers in Human Behavior, 2009. 25(3): p. 655-678.
22. Kerr, A., et al., Adoption of stroke rehabilitation technologies by the user community.
International Journal of Stroke, 2017. 12: p. 12-13.
23. council, D. The Double Diamond. 2023 [cited 2024 07/02/2024]; Available from:
https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/our-resources/the-double-diamond/.
24. Skivington, K., et al., A new framework for developing and evaluating complex interventions:
update of Medical Research Council guidance. bmj, 2021. 374.
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/57227 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
JMIR Preprints Kerr et al
Supplementary Files
https://preprints.jmir.org/preprint/57227 [unpublished, peer-reviewed preprint]
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)