Peterssonetal.BMCFamilyPractice (2020) 21:272
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12875-020-01348-x
RESEARCH ARTICLE Open Access
The experiences of care managers and
rehabilitation coordinators of a primary
care intervention to promote return to
work for patients with common mental
disorders: a qualitative study
Eva-Lisa Petersson1,2, Karin Törnbom1,3, Dominique Hange1,2, Shabnam Nejati1, Margareta Jerlock1, Carl Wikberg1,
Cecilia Björkelund1,2 and Irene Svenningsson1,2*
Abstract
Background: Inanearlierstudy,PRIM-CARERCT,acaremanagerimplementationattheprimarycarecentreshowed
improvedreturntoworkandreducedsickleaveforpatientswithCMD.Tofurtherimprovereturntowork,theproject
Co-Work-Careaddedaperson-centereddialoguemeetingbetweenthepatient,theemployerandtherehabilitation
coordinator,precededbyanincreasedcollaborationbetweencaremanager,rehabilitationcoordinatorandGP.Inthisfirst
qualitativestudyoftheCo-Work-Careproject,weexploredhowcaremanagersandrehabilitationcoordinators
experiencedtheCo-Work-Caremodel.Thepurposeofthisstudywastoexplorecaremanagers’andrehabilitation
coordinators’perceptionsandexperiencesofaclosecollaborationandtheuseoftheperson-centreddialoguemeeting.
Methods:FromanongoingRCTwith20primarycarecentres,caremanagers(CMs)(n=13)andrehabilitation
coordinators(RCs)(n=12)participatedinaqualitativestudywithfocusgroups.Thestudywasconductedintheprimary
healthcareinaSwedishregion.ThedatawasanalysedwithSystematicTextCondensationbyMalterud.
Results:Sevencodesdescribingtheparticipants’experiencesoftheCo-Work-Caremodelwereidentified:1)The
importanceofcollaborationattheprimarycarecentre,2)CollaborationanddivisionofrolesbetweentheRCandtheCM,
3)CollaborationwiththeGeneralpractitioner(GP),4)Theperson-centreddialoguemeeting,5)Initiatingtheperson-
centreddialoguemeeting,6)Theperson-centreddialoguemeetingtoimprovecollaborationwiththeemployer,and7)
Theperson-centreddialoguemeetingtoteachaboutthereturntoworkprocess.
(Continuedonnextpage)
*Correspondence:irene.svenningsson@vgregion.se
1PrimaryHealthCare,SchoolofPublicHealthandCommunityMedicine,
InstituteofMedicine,TheSahlgrenskaAcademy,UniversityofGothenburg,
Gothenburg,Sweden
2ResearchandDevelopmentPrimaryHealthCare,RegionVästraGötaland,
Göteborg,Sweden
Fulllistofauthorinformationisavailableattheendofthearticle
©TheAuthor(s).2020OpenAccessThisarticleislicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0InternationalLicense,
whichpermitsuse,sharing,adaptation,distributionandreproductioninanymediumorformat,aslongasyougive
appropriatecredittotheoriginalauthor(s)andthesource,providealinktotheCreativeCommonslicence,andindicateif
changesweremade.Theimagesorotherthirdpartymaterialinthisarticleareincludedinthearticle'sCreativeCommons
licence,unlessindicatedotherwiseinacreditlinetothematerial.Ifmaterialisnotincludedinthearticle'sCreativeCommons
licenceandyourintendeduseisnotpermittedbystatutoryregulationorexceedsthepermitteduse,youwillneedtoobtain
permissiondirectlyfromthecopyrightholder.Toviewacopyofthislicence,visithttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
TheCreativeCommonsPublicDomainDedicationwaiver(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/)appliestothe
datamadeavailableinthisarticle,unlessotherwisestatedinacreditlinetothedata.
Peterssonetal.BMCFamilyPractice (2020) 21:272 Page2of9
(Continuedfrompreviouspage)
Conclusion:TheincreasedcollaborationwithintheCo-Work-Caremodelcreatedacommonpictureandunderstanding
ofthepatient’ssituation.Theperson-centreddialoguemeetingintherehabilitationprocessbecameabridgebetween
theemployerandthepatient.
Trialregistration:NCT03250026(registeredAugust15,2017).
Keywords:Mentaldisorder,Nurses,Primaryhealthcare,Rehabilitation,Sickleave
Background CM for patients with depression was evaluated in the
Work is essential for the individual’s wellbeing, but also PRIM-CARE RCT and showed positive results concern-
for the personal identity. In general, working people ingreturntowork(RTW)andreduced sickleave [19].
have better mental health than those who are out of In Sweden, a coordinator function for patients with
work [1]. Research has shown that employment can be a sick leave, called rehabilitation coordinator (RC), has
protective factor against common mental disorders been implemented in the primary health care [20]. The
(CMD) [2]. Work is also important when recovering functionismandatory andinitiatedbypublicpolicy[21].
from mental healthconditions[1]. The RC function provides support for patients during
In Sweden, an increasing portion of sick leave episodes theirsickleave andRTW process[20].
arecausedbyCMD,i.e.depression,anxietysyndromesand The Co-Work-Care project evolved from PRIM-CARE
stress-related disorder. Around 2% of the working popula- RCT and aims to further improve RTW and reduce sick
tion, corresponding to 50% of people on sick leave, have a leave time for patients with CMD. The Co-Work-Care
CMDdiagnosisasreasonforabsenteeism[3].InSweden,a project added a person-centered meeting between the
majority of the individuals with CMD seek primary health patient, the employer and the RC, coupled with an in-
care[4]asdoamajorityofthosewhohaveareducedability creased collaboration between CM, RC and GP (https://
to work [5]. Depressive disorders impact on work ability clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03250026).
andhaveextensivesocietalconsequences[6].Theprovision In this first qualitative study of the Co-Work-Care
of a structured telephone outreach in combination with a project, our aim was to gain knowledge of how CMs and
care management programme and medication [7] appears RCsexperienced theCo-Work-Caremodel.
to be one realistic way to reduce sick leave among people Thepurposeofthisstudywastoexplorecaremanagers’
with CMD. The use of reality-based knowledge from the and rehabilitation coordinators’ perceptions and experi-
workplace in the intervention seems to reduce depressive ences of a close collaboration and the use of the person-
severity symptoms [8]. Thus far, workplace interventions centreddialoguemeeting,theCo-Work-Caremodel.
havenotshownanyconsiderableimpactontimetoreturn
towork[9].Forprofessionals,oneimportantfactortotake Methods
intoaccountisthepatient’sownexpectationsaboutreturn- Design
ingtowork[10–12]. In the present qualitative study, we used data obtained
In primary health care, the Collaborative Care Model, from four focus group (FG) discussions [22, 23]. Data
based on Wagner’s Chronic Care Model [13], is well analysiswasperformedaccordingtoMalterud’s[24]Sys-
known. The model has four key components: team- tematic Text Condensation (STC). STC is a descriptive
based approach to patients, structured care plan, sched- and explorative method for thematic cross-case analysis
uled patient follow-ups, and enhanced inter-professional with apragmaticapproach [24].
communication [14, 15]. Compared to usual care, Col-
laborative Care Model has been shown to be an effective Theco-work-careproject
way of working with patients with anxiety and/or de- In the project a Co-Work-Care model was developed
pression [14]. that included an in-depth collaboration between CM
In the Collaborative Care Model, different profes- and RC, followed by a person-centred dialogue meeting
sionals such as nurses, general practitioners (GP), thera- between the patient and the employer with the RC serv-
pists, and paramedics collaborate with a specially trained ing as a dialogue moderator. In the Co-Work Care
care manager (CM) as facilitator. The CM coordinates model, the process starts when the CMD patient meets
care by maintaining a close and regular contact with pa- the GP, who assesses the need for a sick leave certificate
tients and aligns efforts for their individual needs [16]. and refers the patient to the CM and RC. The model in-
Studiesshow thataCMprovidesimprovements both for cluded an in-depth collaboration between CM and RC,
patients with depression [17] and for the physical health based on the unique prerequisites at the PCC. During
of patients with chronic heart failure [18]. The use of a the care process and cooperation between CM, RC and
Peterssonetal.BMCFamilyPractice (2020) 21:272 Page3of9
GP, the patient situation becomes clearer and forms a process with regard to medical insurance issues. Further,
basisfor theperson-centreddialoguemeeting. the RC should coordinate rehabilitation as well as be a
knowledgebrokerandadviser regarding certificateissues
Theperson-centreddialoguemeeting andtherehabilitation plan[20].
We used the theoretical framework of the convergence
dialogue meeting, a strategy that provides a way to in- Settingandparticipants
crease RTW and reduce total sick leave time [25]. The The participantsinthepresentstudywereCMsandRCs
core intervention in the convergence dialogue meeting is fromtheinterventiongroupatanongoingRCTandrep-
a dialogue between the employer and employee with the resented urban and rural primary care centres, operated
convergence dialogue meeting consultant serving as the by private and public actors. The CMs and RCs under-
moderator, in order to reach concrete short-term and went a one day educational session about the project
long-term solutions [26]. The convergence dialogue Co-Work-Care. They had worked in the project for
meeting has been modified to meet the prerequisites of about one year. Most of the participants were nurses
the primary care centres and thus is referred to as the with an additional role as CM and/or RC. During the re-
person-centred dialogue meeting. This person-centred current training sessions, all 34 CMs and RCs were in-
dialogue meeting is between patient and employer, with vited and 25 participated in the study, including one
the RC serving as the dialogue moderator. The person- person with both functions (CMs n=13 and RCs n=
centred dialogue meeting is based on the patients’ per- 12). Due to lack oftime, nine participantscould not par-
ceptionoftheirsituationandclarifiestheirneedsandre- ticipate.Fourfocusgroups(n=6,n=6,n=6,n=7)with
quirements. The aim of the meeting is to give the 24 women and 1 man were selected. The participants
patient the opportunity to sit down with the employerin were informed that the discussions were voluntary,
a calm and neutral environment, and together with the audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim and kept confi-
employer to describe their situation. The meeting is dential. The transcripts were not returned to the
based on the patient’s situation and includes no negoti- participants.
ation. Before the meeting, the RC prepares thorough
written and oral information about the aim of the meet- Datacollection
inginordertoinformthe patient and theemployer.The Focus group discussions were used to collect the data
meeting is carried out in a neutral place, preferably at and were moderated by ELP and IS with SN (RN), MJ
the primary care centres. The RC leads the person- (PhD, RN) and CW (PhD, RN) as assessors. A guideline
centred dialogue meeting and is also responsible for en- was developed with questions for the focus group and
suring that the patient’s needs and perception of the was presented for the participants at the focus group
situation are in focus. The RC starts the meeting with session. Fieldnotes were taken by the assessors during
the following question for the patient: “Can you tell us the session. The focus group discussion took place dur-
about how you perceive your situation?” and the follow- ing a single session. The questions in the guideline were
ingquestion for the employer: “How do you perceive the validated through discussions with CM, RC and within
patient’s situation?”. The meeting continues for 45–60 the research group. The researchers took part in the
min. The employer and the patient together with the RC learning process during the one day educational session
endthemeetingwithaconclusionandanagreement.Fi- prior to the study start, and the researchers also shared
nally, the RC documents in writing the facts, agreements their goal regarding the study with the participants. The
andpossible actions. focus groups took place in spring and autumn 2019 at
the Primary Care Research and Development Depart-
Caremanager mentinGothenburgandthedurationofthefocusgroup
A CM improves high accessibility and continuity. Health was 45 to 60min. The focus group guide included the
care with a CM is based on the patient’s specific needs following questions: What does collaboration mean to
over time and provides support regarding medical issues you? How do you perceive early contacts with the em-
and self-management. It is thus a form of organisation ployer? How do you perceive the collaboration among
that allows for complexity, person-centred care and theCMandRC?How doesthiscollaboration impactthe
interaction[19]. communication among RC, patient and the employer?
Seeadditionalfile1.
Rehabilitationcoordinator
The RC provides support for the primary health care Analysis
centres for effective collaboration in the sick leave certi- The analysis was conducted using the STC by Malterud
fication and rehabilitation process [20]. The RC should [24] and was acollaboration amongELP,IS, KT, CB and
also be a support for sick-listed patients in the sick leave DH. ELP is an occupational therapist and IS is a district
Peterssonetal.BMCFamilyPractice (2020) 21:272 Page4of9
nurse; both have doctoral degrees and long experience turnedto.Goodcommunicationwasalsoseenasaguar-
from primary health care. KT is a social worker with a antee that all tasks were done, and that nothing fell be-
doctoral degree and experience from psychotherapy in tweenthecracks.
outpatient care. CB is a general practitioner and profes-
sor, and DH is a general practitioner and associate pro- It saves an incredible amount of time! Instead of
fessor. Five of the researchers conducted the analyses writingalotand sendingitaway, Icanknockonthe
and all were females. Malterud [24] does not use the door and leave the information directly to whom it
concept of saturation concerning samplingmethodology. concerns.(FG1)
Instead, it is important to provide coherent stories to es-
tablish an adequate information-rich sample grounded Sharing different views on how best to treat patients
in empirical data. The analysis was data-driven, with no with CMD was said to improve the quality of health
theoreticalframeworkastemplate. care.However,itwasstressedthattomakethiscollabor-
The following four steps guided the analysis: 1) The ation work, professionals needed to take a personal re-
datasetwasreadseveraltimeswithanopenmindtoob- sponsibility and be willing to lose prestige for the good
tain an overall impression. 2) Units of meaning were of the patients. Problems with cooperation were lifted as
identified representing different aspects of participants’ something that could harm the patient’s recovery or
experiences of collaboration among CMs, RCs and GPs evenincrease theiremotional suffering.
and their experiences of the person-centred dialogue
meeting, coded accordingly. 3) Condensing the contents Collaborationanddivisionofrolesbetweenthe
of each of the coded groups, an artificial quotation was rehabilitationcoordinatorandthecaremanager
constructed, maintaining the original terminology ap- CMs and RCs thought that the Co-Work-Care model
plied by the participants. 4) Finally, each code group was had improved and developed the collaboration at the
summarised to a generalised descriptions concerning primary care centres. Through this method, the CM and
collaboration andtheperson-centred dialoguemeeting. the RC had further developed a common working model
for patients with CMD. A goal was to be flexible about
Results patients’ needs, so that patients received help from the
The close in-depth collaboration and knowledge sharing most suitable professional at the right time. In most
amongCMs andRCs at theprimarycare centres created cases the CM took the role to first understand the pa-
added value in the health care services. Good communi- tient’s situation, and then to thoroughly communicate
cation was also seen as a guarantee that all tasks were this information to the RC. The role of the RC was to
done. Participants in the study emphasised the difficulty use the information strategically, inaway that benefitted
in working with some locum tenens GPs, who often the patient during the person-centred dialogue meeting
switch workplace. RCs expressed that a visit to the pa- with the employer. The main goals in this meeting were
tient’s workplace benefited the understanding of the to create a common ground concerning the patient’s
working environment. However, the person-centred dia- situation and to support the patient in relation to the
logue meeting was preferably conducted at the primary employer. The RC also had the main role in practical
carecentres.There wasanagreementamongthepartici- matters concerning thesickleave.
pants that the RC was a bridge between the employer
and the patient and that an early initiation of the I can feel that collaboration is like putting an equal
person-centred dialogue meeting was beneficial for the sign between collaboration and qualitative-
patient. A common source of frustration was that em- enhancing measures. … .. to get more substantiated
ployers generally knew so little about their own respon- decisions.(FG4)
sibilities for the working environment and for
rehabilitation. The RCs perceived that the person- CollaborationwiththeGP
centred dialogue meeting sometimes revealed an un- According to the participants, the CM and the RC
known complex situation. planned the interventions for patients with CMD, while
the GPs prescribed medication or were involved in prac-
Theimportanceofcollaborationattheprimarycare tical matters regarding sick leave. Participants perceived
centres that the GPs often followed their recommendations,
CMs and RCs described that close collaboration and since they were expected to have extensive information
knowledge sharing among professionals at the primary about thepatients’situation.
care centres created added value in their health care ser-
vices. The patients were ensured of receiving advice re- The GPs benefit so much from a close cooperation
garding RTW, irrespective of which professional they with us. I have spoken many hours with the patient,
Peterssonetal.BMCFamilyPractice (2020) 21:272 Page5of9
and then I summarise everything in notes. I have the and for the caring process. Thus, RCs needed to know
habitofremindingtheGPstoreadwhatIhavewrit- which information they could share during the person-
ten. You have to make sure and work a little harder centred dialogue meeting. Nevertheless, it was men-
toremindnewGPstoread thenotes. (FG2) tioned that even when patients experienced problems
outside of work, their overall situation could be im-
Participants emphasised the difficulty posed by the fact proved bycreatingahealthierwork situation.
that many GPs switched positions often, and did not
have time to become familiar with the working model … so that the contact with the workplace becomes a
for patients with CMD. Participants also perceived that, health factor, so that the patient can get better, and
at a structural level, GPs were not expected to be very not get into isolation or social exclusion. To create
aware of the patient’s overall situation. Both these issues this, I don’t see the underlying problem as especially
were seen as barriers to a more profound collaboration important … what exactly the problem is, so to
with theGPsingeneral. speak.(FG3)
Theperson-centreddialoguemeeting Initiatingtheperson-centreddialoguemeeting
The main purpose of the person-centred dialogue meet- Having a meeting early in the sick leave period to create
ing was to create a basis for collaboration where the pa- a plan with the patient and the employer was considered
tient felt safe to communicate needs and concerns from beneficial for the patient. A shared experience was that
his/her own perspective. The primary care centres was when the RC scheduled the person-centred dialogue
seen as a neutral place for the meeting, whereas the meeting at a later stage, it became more difficult for the
workplace was considered as potentially intimidating patient and the employer to reach a shared view of the
from apatient’spointofview. problems.
Participants agreed that the RC should function as a RCs experienced that patients often interpreted em-
bridge between the employer and the patient, to lay the ployer’s unwillingness to reach out as indifference, while
basis for ahealthyrelationship thatcould contribute toa the employer could be concerned about not putting a
sustainable RTW. A common experience was that when pressure on the patient. To avoid such misunderstand-
the employer and the patient tried to solve problems en- ings, an early meeting could serve as an icebreaker, spar-
tirely without help from the RC, they often fell into ha- ing both parties some distress, and making it easier for
bitual relationship patterns which complicated their thepatienttofocusongetting well.
ability tofindsustainable solutions.
It is also easier when the patients still have their
It is generally beneficial to include an external part work identity. If you wait for too long, they will more
at the meeting. The employer is higher in the hier- and more identifythemselvesasbeingsick. (FG3)
archy, and the patient is in a vulnerable situation.
Therefore, the patient may benefit from getting sup- Scheduling a first talk with the employer early on also
portfromsomeonewhoisexternal.(FG1) meant practical advantages concerning sick leave. The
RC could then form a time plan together with the pa-
The person-centred dialogue meeting was emphasised as tient and the employer, so that all parties knew what to
crucial when dealing with an unsustainable work situ- expect andhow toact, wellbeforethesickleave ended.
ation. RCs described how they made sure to clarify and
confirm perspectives of the patient as well as the em- Some changes that need to be done cannot be fixed
ployer, in order to create a plan based on a common within a day. Sometimes the employer needs to start
understanding. up a process at the workplace, and therefore we need
Several RCs wanted the person-centred dialogue meet- tostartthiscommunication earlyon.(FG4)
ing alsotofunctionas a platformfor makinga rehabilita-
tion plan. They considered it ineffective to first gather a Having a collaborative talk with the employer prior to
lot of informationaboutthe patient,and thennot beable the person-centred dialogue meeting was done to pre-
tousethisinapurposefulwayduringthemeeting.Others pare oneself for how the situation was perceived by the
felt that it was better tokeep the person-centred dialogue employer and thus facilitated the development of a re-
meeting as an initial “ice-breaker” discussion, to create a turn to work plan. However, participants explained that
solidgrounduponwhichtobuildfurtherwork. if the patient’s condition was too poor, they had to wait
In some cases, participants received information of a with the person-centred dialogue meeting, to avoid the
personal nature from the patients that could have been risk of not being able to establish a functioning collabor-
meaningful for understanding the development of CMD ationbetweentheemployerandthe patient.
Peterssonetal.BMCFamilyPractice (2020) 21:272 Page6of9
Person-centreddialoguemeetingtoimprove According to participants, the person-centred dialogue
collaborationwiththeemployer meeting sometimes revealed a complex situation, for ex-
RCs perceived employers as being generally humble ample that the patient had been bullied at work or had
abouttheirlackofknowledgeofmentalhealthdisorders, an overly complicated relationship with the employer. In
and they seemed grateful about receiving practical help some cases, participants decided that problems were so
and valuable advice from the primary care centres. RCs difficult to resolve, that it would be in the patient’s best
communicated a frustration about the fact that em- interesttochangeworkplace.
ployers generally knew so little about their own respon-
sibilities for working environments and rehabilitation. Discussion
Some participants even thought that patients would not The purpose of this study was to explore care managers’
have become ill in the first place if employers had and rehabilitation coordinators’ perception and experi-
known more abouttheseissues. ences of a close collaboration and the use of the person-
centreddialoguemeeting,i.e.theCo-Work-Care model.
Asastartingpoint,Iusuallyasktheemployer ifthey IntheCo-Work-Caremodel,theCMandRChavedif-
have easier, uncomplicated tasks that we can offer ferent roles that complement each other. The CM gives
the patient. It is often difficult for the patients to support to the patient in medical issues and self-
concentrate onseveraltasks simultaneously.(FG3) management, and the RC supports the patient on sick
leave during the rehabilitation process until return to
Participants agreed that having full cooperation with the work. Both CM and RC and the close in-depth collabor-
employer was crucial in order to help them change pos- ation and knowledge sharing created an added value in
sibly harmful working conditions. It was also agreed that the understanding of the rehabilitation process. A good
if nothing changed, the risk for the employee to end up communication and a common working model (the Co-
onsickleaveagainwashigh. Work-Care model) were seen as a guarantee to reach
the best solution for the patient, which often entailed an
Person-centreddialoguemeetingtoteachaboutthe early introduction of the person-centred dialogue meet-
returntoworkprocess ing and gradual RTW. Both RCs and CMs stressed the
Collaboration was also considered important to resolve difficulty when working with some GPs with temporary
misunderstandings about how to think about the RTW positions, as this hampered continuity of care and pre-
process. Participants emphasised that returning to work vented them from being able to become familiar with
had to be seen as an ongoing, one-step-at-a-time the working model for patients with CMD. The RC be-
process. came a bridge between the employer and the patient,
and an early person-centred dialogue meeting was per-
Some people think that you need to feel completely ceived beneficial for the patient. The RCs experienced
well before you can return to work. It’s more about frustration when they realised that employers lacked
that you get well by gradually increasing the work- knowledge of their responsibilities for the work environ-
load. ment and the rehabilitation process. The RC perceived
(FG3) that the person-centred dialogue meeting sometimes re-
vealed unknowncomplexsituations.
The way to a better working situation was said to go The close collaboration and knowledge sharing among
through creating a healthier and sustainable working the professionals seem to fit well with the Collaborative
situation. However, it was mentioned that at the begin- Care Model [27]. We believe that the in-depth collabor-
ning of a collaboration, both employers and patients ation between CM and RC added a new, extended
could share the idea that resting at home was the best knowledge about each other’s working areas, giving a
way to recover one’s working capacity. Finding ways to furthervalue to the patient. However, the study does not
collaborate with theemployer,creatingsolutionsfor bet- reveal how the actual collaboration actually was carried
ter working conditions, and planning for a gradual re- out. To achieve a successful working collaboration
turn to work were therefore considered incredibly process, the CM and RC need to be willing to collabor-
important. ate, and the organisation needs to provide the opportun-
ity for such collaboration [28, 29]. The professional’s
During the person-centred dialogue meeting, em- individual background is also important when defining
ployers often understand things that they haven’t the patient’s need for RTW, according to Eikenaar [30].
seen before or understood the extent of. The conver- That the CM and RC shared goals is important, in order
sations can work as an eye-opener for the patient’s to avoid that the patient receives different advice from
situationand fortheworking environment.(FG2) different professionals [31–33]. However, de Riijk et al.
Peterssonetal.BMCFamilyPractice (2020) 21:272 Page7of9
showedthattheprofessionals’dependency oneachother The RCs stressed that the employers generally were
in achieving one’s goal was more important for cooper- humble about their lack of knowledge about work-
ation than the goal as such [28]. Good communication related mental health conditions. The collaboration with
between the professionals can become a safety net that the employer in order to give practical help and valuable
prevents the patient from falling between the cracks [27, advice was therefore considered vital. Further, the im-
34]. Thus, collaboration within the team, where every portance of work-related interventions, the severity of
professional contributes with different competencies, is symptoms, and the individual expectations all need to be
crucial to gaining a picture of the patient’s entire situ- highlighted [37] and to be taken seriously in the person-
ation. The Co-Work-Care model with its focus on the centreddialoguemeeting.
collaboration and person-centred dialogue meeting ap- The person-centred dialogue meeting sometimes re-
pears to have an important impact on both CMs’ and vealedacomplexsituation,andcomplexsituationscannot
RCs’ way of working in the health care and the RTW be solved with simple models. A flexible approach is ne-
process. The professionals became flexible about the pa- cessary when new collaboration methods are imple-
tient’s needs, meaning that the most suitable profes- mented. In the present study, the RC was able to support
sional wasengagedat therighttime. thecollaborationbetweentheemployerandtheemployee
The participants perceived that GPs often followed the in order to find solutions for better working conditions,
CMs’ and RCs’ recommendations, since they were ex- anaspectthatwashighlightedasimportant.Thecollabor-
pected to have extensive information about the patient’s ation between the employer and the employee is vital in
situation. When this collaboration worked well, it bene- the RTW, according to Hoefsmit [38]. The Co-Work-
fitted the patient. However, when locum GPs were in- Caremodelgivesopportunitiestostrengthenthepatient’s
volved, there was not enough time for these GPs to be a courage to talk about the entire situation and to under-
partoftheCo-Work-Caremodelfor thepatients. stand the different components in the patient’s working
It seems preferable to accomplish the person- situation. The importance of understanding the compo-
centred dialogue meeting at the primary care centre, nents included in the patient’s entire situation has also
a neutral location, instead of at the workplace, which beenshowninanearlystudy[35].
might be intimidating for the patient. A common ex- We believe that these results could be transferable to
perience among the RCs was that the patient and the professionals supporting other patient groups not only
employer often fell into a habitual relationship pattern in primary health care in Sweden, but also in other
that complicated a sustainable solution. In order to countries.
create a plan for a common understanding, it was im-
portant to clarify and confirm the perspectives of the Strengthsandlimitations
patient as well as of the employer. Some RCs wanted We used four focus groups with 25 individuals in all. The
the person-centred dialogue meeting to be a platform number of participating individuals was a strength in the
for making the rehabilitation plan, while others study.Thefocusgroupdiscussionsallowedtheparticipants
wanted it to be an initial icebreaker to create a solid torevealtoeachothertheirexperiencesofworkingasCMs
ground upon which further work could be built. and RCs and to share their perceptions about the Co-
However, the main intention of the person-centred Work-Care model. The collected data was rich and varied
dialogue meeting is to give the patients an opportun- with many different statements. The collaborative work
ity to put into words how they perceive their entire during the analytical phase incorporated different profes-
situation. Webelievethatwhenthepatientsexpresstheir sionals’pointsofview,whichbroadenedtheperspective.
viewsaboutthesituation,inpresenceoftheemployerand A potential weakness in the study is that two of the
withthesupportoftheRC,thiscreatesanopportunityto co-authors, ELP and IS, both collected data and took
gainacommonpictureandunderstandingofthepatient’s part in data analysis. This potential bias was compen-
situation[35].Toencourageandsupportthepatienttore- sated for in the analysis by the participation of the other
maininor(re)-enterworkassoonaspossibleiscrucialin co-authors(DH, KT, CB)inthe analysis.Anotherpoten-
theRTWprocess[1]. tial weakness could be that it might be difficult to bring
Both RC and CM perceived that an early person- up sensitive experiences in a group discussion. We did
centred dialogue meeting involving the employer was not include GPs in the focus group discussions, but plan
important for the patient’s RTW. This is in line with toperform focus group discussionsalsowith GPs.
Hiske et al., [36] who showed that work-related inter-
ventions that support workers with depression improve Conclusion
work ability. A common view of the patient’s situation is The increased collaboration between CM and RC cre-
important to be able to intervene and make predictions ated an opportunity to gain a common picture and un-
about thesickleaveprocess. derstanding of the patient’s situation. The person-
Peterssonetal.BMCFamilyPractice (2020) 21:272 Page8of9
centred dialogue meeting led by the RC became a bridge RegionVästraGötaland,Göteborg,Sweden.3DepartmentofSocialWork,
between the employer and the patient. The Co-Work- UniversityofGothenburg,Gothenburg,Sweden.
Care model seems to be beneficial also for the person
Received:15June2020Accepted:7December2020
with CMD.
However, the locum GPs’ temporary employment situ-
ation led to a reduction of continuity and a lack of col- References
laboration within the team. This issue was sometimes 1. WadellG.Isworkgoodforyourhealthandwellbeing?London:The
StationaryOffice;2006.
seen as a barrier to a more profound collaboration with
2. vanderNoordtM.HIJ,DroomersM,properKI.Healtheffectsof
theGPsingeneral. employment:asystematicreviewofprospectivestudies.OccupEnviron
The participants demonstrate the value of a cohesive
Med.2014;71(10):730–6.
3. Rapport–Uppföljningavsjukfrånvaronsutveckling2020(Report
approach where collaboration is the glue between the
-monitoringthedevelopmentofsickleave)https://forsakringskassan.se/
professionals and the person-centered dialogue meeting wps/wcm/connect/974d1839-45b5-4f14-b0e1-8ccb31cbf23d/svar-pa-
revealedthe patients situation. regeringsuppdrag-rapport-uppfoljning-av-sjukfranvarons-utveckling-2020.
pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CVID=:2020.Accessed10nov2020.
4. SundquistJ,OhlssonH,SundquistK,KendlerKS.Commonadultpsychiatric
Supplementary Information disordersinSwedishprimarycarewheremostmentalhealthpatientsare
Theonlineversioncontainssupplementarymaterialavailableathttps://doi. treated.BMCPsychiatry.2017;17(1):235.
org/10.1186/s12875-020-01348-x. 5. LernerD,HenkeRM.Whatdoesresearchtellusaboutdepression,job
performance,andworkproductivity?JOccupEnvironMed.2008;50(4):401–
10.
Additionalfile1.Thefocusgroupguide. 6. MurrayM,BodenheimerT,RittenhouseD,GrumbachK.Improvingtimely
accesstoprimarycare:casestudiesoftheadvancedaccessmodel.JAMA.
2003;289(8):1042–6.
Abbreviations
7. NieuwenhuijsenK,FaberB,VerbeekJH,Neumeyer-GromenA,HeesHL,
CM:Caremanager;CMD:Commonmentaldisorder;GP:Generalpractitioner;
VerhoevenAC.Interventionstoimprovereturntoworkindepressed
RC:Rehabilitationcoordinator;RTW:Returntowork
people.CochraneDatabaseSystRev.2014;(12):CD006237.
8. WisenthalA,KrupaT,KirshBH,LysaghtR.Cognitiveworkhardeningfor
Acknowledgements returntoworkfollowingdepression:aninterventionstudy:Le
Wethanktheparticipantsofthestudy. reentrainementcognitifautravailpourfavoriserleretourautravailalasuite
d'unedepression:etuded'intervention.CanJOccupTher.2018;85(1):21–32.
Authors’contributions 9. vanVilsterenM,vanOostromSH,deVetHC,FrancheRL,BootCR,Anema
ELPandISparticipatedinthedesignofthestudy,performeddataanalyses, JR.Workplaceinterventionstopreventworkdisabilityinworkersonsick
andtooktheleadindraftingthemanuscript.KTparticipatedinperforming leave.CochraneDatabaseSystRev.2015;10:CD006955.
dataanalysisandhelpedtodraftthemanuscript.DHandCBparticipatedin 10. EricsonSjostromM,WallinI,StrandhagenE,BaigiA,HensingG,Bjorkelund
thedesign,performingdataanalysisandhelpedtodraftthemanuscript.MJ, C.GPandpatientpredictionsofsick-listingduration:howwelldothey
SNandCWparticipatedindesign,datacollectionandhelpedtodraftthe correspond?Aprospectiveobservationalstudy.ScandJPrimHealthCare.
manuscript.Allauthorsreadandapprovedthefinalmanuscript. 2014;32(2):73–7.
11. SampereM,GimenoD,SerraC,PlanaM,LopezJC,MartinezJM,etal.
Funding Returntoworkexpectationsofworkersonlong-termnon-work-relatedsick
GrantsfromForteDnr2016–07412,Dnr2018–01266andgrantsfromthe leave.JOccupRehabil.2012;22(1):15–26.
SwedishstateundertheagreementbetweentheSwedishgovernmentand 12. SkoglundI,BjorkelundC,SvenningssonI,PeterssonEL,AugustssonP,Nejati
thecountycouncils,theALFagreement(nr68771).Thefunding S,etal.Influenceofantidepressanttherapyonsickleaveinprimarycare:
organisationshadnoroleintheplanning,executionoranalysesofthe ADAS,acomparativeobservationalstudy.Heliyon.2019;5(1):e01101.
study.OpenAccessfundingprovidedbyGothenburgUniversityLibrary. 13. WagnerEH,AustinBT,VonKorffM.Organizingcareforpatientswith
chronicillness.MilbankQ.1996;74(4):511–44.
14. ArcherJ,BowerP,GilbodyS,LovellK,RichardsD,GaskL,etal.Collaborative
Availabilityofdataandmaterials
carefordepressionandanxietyproblems.CochraneDatabaseSystRev.
Toprotecttheparticipantsconfidentiality,thedatasetsgeneratedand
2012;10:CD006525.
analysedduringthecurrentstudyarenotpubliclyavailableduetoSwedish
15. GoodrichDE,KilbourneAM,NordKM,BauerMS.Mentalhealthcollaborative
law,butareavailablefromthecorrespondingauthoruponreasonable
careanditsroleinprimarycaresettings.CurrPsychiatryRep.2013;15(8):383.
request.
16. RostK,NuttingP,SmithJ,WernerJ,DuanN.Improvingdepression
outcomesincommunityprimarycarepractice:arandomizedtrialofthe
Ethicsapprovalandconsenttoparticipate
quESTintervention.Qualityenhancementbystrategicteaming.JGenIntern
EthicalapprovalwasobtainedfromtheRegionalEthicalCommitteefor Med.2001;16(3):143–9.
MedicalResearchinGothenburg(DNR459–17).
17. HuangH,TabbKM,CerimeleJM,AhmedN,BhatA,KesterR.Collaborative
Writteninformedconsentwasobtainedfromallparticipantspriorto
CareforWomenwithDepression:asystematicreview.Psychosomatics.
conductingtheFocusgroups. 2017;58(1):11–8.
18. HuaCY,HuangY,SuYH,BuJY,TaoHM.Collaborativecaremodelimproves
Consentforpublication self-careability,qualityoflifeandcardiacfunctionofpatientswithchronic
Notapplicable. heartfailure.BrazJMedBiolRes.2017;50(11):e6355.
19. BjorkelundC,SvenningssonI,HangeD,UdoC,PeterssonEL,AriaiN,etal.
Competinginterests Clinicaleffectivenessofcaremanagersincollaborativecareforpatients
Theauthorsdeclarethattheyhavenocompetinginterests. withdepressioninSwedishprimaryhealthcare:apragmaticcluster
randomizedcontrolledtrial.BMCFamPract.2018;19(1):28.
Authordetails 20. SverigesKommunerochRegioner.Koordineringavsjukskrivningoch
1PrimaryHealthCare,SchoolofPublicHealthandCommunityMedicine, rehabilitering(Coordinationofsickleaveandrehabilitation)2015.https://skr.
InstituteofMedicine,TheSahlgrenskaAcademy,UniversityofGothenburg, se/halsasjukvard/sjukskrivningochrehabilitering/funktionforkoordinering.1033.
Gothenburg,Sweden.2ResearchandDevelopmentPrimaryHealthCare, html2015.Accessed27may2020.
Peterssonetal.BMCFamilyPractice (2020) 21:272 Page9of9
21. Regeringskansliet.Lag2019:1297.Lagomkoordineringsinsatserför
sjukskrivnapatienter.(Lawaboutcoordinationforpatientonsickleave).
Socialdepartementet,(MinistryofSocialAffairs)2019.https://data.riksdagen.
se/fil/4675B3B5-64FA-49B2-90A8-2F8021F1CF65.Accessed10nov2020.
22. Kruger.Focusgroups:apracicalguideforappliedresearchSingapore:SAGE;2015.
23. Morgan.Focusgroupsasqualitativeresearch:Vol.2nded.London:SAGE;
1997.
24. MalterudK.Systematictextcondensation:astrategyforqualitativeanalysis.
ScandJPublicHealth.2012;40(8):795–805.
25. KarlsonB,JonssonP,PalssonB,AbjornssonG,MalmbergB,LarssonB,etal.
Returntoworkafteraworkplace-orientedinterventionforpatientsonsick-leave
forburnout--aprospectivecontrolledstudy.BMCPublicHealth.2010;10:301.
26. KarlsonB,ÖK.ADAArbetsplatsDialogförArbetsåtergång.Användarmanual
v.1.3.Lund:Avdförarbets-ochmiljömedicin.Lundsuniversitet;2014.p.
2014.
27. HanssonA,FribergF,SegestenK,GeddaB,MattssonB.Twosidesofthe
coin-generalpractitioners'experienceofworkinginmultidisciplinary
teams.JInterprofCare.2008;22(1):5–16.
28. deRijkA,vanRaakA,vanderMadeJ.Anewtheoreticalmodelfor
cooperationinpublichealthsettings:theRDICmodel.QualHealthRes.
2007;17(8):1103–16.
29. HultbergEL,LonnrothK,AllebeckP.Interdisciplinarycollaborationbetween
primarycare,socialinsuranceandsocialservicesintherehabilitationof
peoplewithmusculoskeletaldisorder:effectsonself-ratedhealthand
physicalperformance.JInterprofCare.2005;19(2):115–24.
30. EikenaarT,deRijkAE,MeershoekA.What’sinaframe?Howprofessionals
assessclientsinDutchworkreintegrationpractice.SocPolicyAdmin.2016;
50(7):767–86.
31. BabikerA,ElHusseiniM,AlNemriA,AlFrayhA,AlJuryyanN,FakiMO,etal.
Healthcareprofessionaldevelopment:workingasateamtoimprove
patientcare.SudanJPaediatr.2014;14(2):9–16.
32. DelvaD,JamiesonM,LemieuxM.Teameffectivenessinacademicprimary
healthcareteams.JInterprofCare.2008;22(6):598–611.
33. SargeantJ,LoneyE,MurphyG.Effectiveinterprofessionalteams:"contactis
notenough"tobuildateam.JContinEducHealProf.2008;28(4):228–34.
34. SvenningssonI,UdoC,WestmanJ,NejatiS,HangeD,BjorkelundC,etal.
Creatingasafetynetforpatientswithdepressioninprimarycare;a
qualitativestudyofcaremanagers'experiences.ScandJPrimHealthCare.
2018;36(4):355–62.
35. CorbiereM,SamsonE,NegriniA,St-ArnaudL,DurandMJ,CoutuMF,etal.
Factorsperceivedbyemployeesregardingtheirsickleavedueto
depression.DisabilRehabil.2016;38(6):511–9.
36. HeesHL,MWJK,ScheneAH.Longitudinalrelationshipbetweendepressive
symptomsandworkoutcomesinclinicallytreatedpatientswithlong-term
sicknessabsencerelatedtomajordepressivedisorder.JAffectDisord.2013;
148(2–3):272–7.
37. deVriesH,FishtaA,WeikertB,RodriguezSanchezA,WegewitzU.
Determinantsofsicknessabsenceandreturntoworkamongemployees
withcommonmentaldisorders:ascopingreview.JOccupRehabil.2018;
28(3):393–417.
38. HoefsmitN,deRijkA,HoukesI.Workresumptionatthepriceofdistrust:a
qualitativestudyonreturntoworklegislationintheNetherlands.BMC
PublicHealth.2013;13:153.
Publisher’s Note
SpringerNatureremainsneutralwithregardtojurisdictionalclaimsin
publishedmapsandinstitutionalaffiliations.