BRIEFRESEARCHREPORT
published:13July2022
doi:10.3389/fresc.2022.945464
Enhancing Person-Centered
Audiologic Rehabilitation: Exploring
the Use of an Interview Tool Based
on the International Classification of
Functioning, Disability, and Health
Core Sets for Hearing Loss
SarahGranberg1,2* andÅsaSkagerstrand2,3
1SchoolofHealthSciences,FacultyofMedicineandHealth,ÖrebroUniversity,Örebro,Sweden,2AudiologicalResearch
Center,FacultyofMedicineandHealth,ÖrebroUniversity,Örebro,Sweden,3DepartmentofAudiology,FacultyofMedicine
andHealth,ÖrebroUniversity,Örebro,Sweden
Health care interventions that are intended to improve hearing should be based on the
resultsofindividualpatientassessments.Toimprovetheseassessments,thefeasibilityof
anInternationalClassificationofFunctioning,Disability,andHealth(ICF)-basedinterview
Editedby:
tool was tested in a single clinical setting in Sweden. Audiologists participating in the
JuliaPatrickEngkasan,
UniversityofMalaya,Malaysia study used the interview tool during a four-week testing period and provided written
Reviewedby: reflections after each session. The use of this tool was also evaluated in a focus group
RazanAlfakir, interview that took place after the completion of the project. The results of this study
MayoClinicFlorida,UnitedStates
identified both process-related and structure-related factors that were highly relevant
AmishaKanji,
UniversityoftheWitwatersrand, to the implementation of this interview tool. Overall, the findings revealed that the use
SouthAfrica
of this interview tool promoted person-centered care in encounters focused on clinical
*Correspondence:
audiological rehabilitation. Specifically, the ICF-based holistic approach permitted the
SarahGranberg
sarah.granberg@oru.se audiologists to acquire more comprehensive patient narratives. The use of the ICF
interviewtoolfacilitatedpatientparticipationandpermittedtheaudiologisttocollectmore
Specialtysection: substantialandmeaningfulinformationfromeachpatient.
Thisarticlewassubmittedto
HumanFunctioning,
Keywords: ICF (International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health), hearing loss, audiologic
asectionofthejournal
rehabilitation(AR),person-centered,interviewtool
FrontiersinRehabilitationSciences
Received:16May2022
Accepted:24June2022 INTRODUCTION
Published:13July2022
TheWorldHealthOrganization(WHO)estimatesthatapproximately20%oftheglobalpopulation
Citation:
GranbergSandSkagerstrandÅ currently suffers from some degree of hearing loss. Hearing loss is likely to increase and is
(2022)EnhancingPerson-Centered anticipatedtohaveanimpacton25%ofthepopulationby2050;thus,approximately7%ofthe
AudiologicRehabilitation:Exploring globalpopulationwillrequirehearinghealthcare(1).
theUseofanInterviewToolBasedon While the etiology of this disorder varies, sensorineural hearing losses are dominant in
theInternationalClassificationof
the adult population (2, 3). Damages in the inner ear and/or the central auditory system
Functioning,Disability,andHealth
results in sensorineural hearing loss. These losses result in a diminished ability to detect
CoreSetsforHearingLoss.
Front.Rehabilit.Sci.3:945464. and comprehend sounds that are regarded as normally perceivable. Sensorineural hearing
doi:10.3389/fresc.2022.945464 loss also has an impact on the quality of heard sounds, for example, speech that is
FrontiersinRehabilitationSciences|www.frontiersin.org 1 July2022|Volume3|Article945464
GranbergandSkagerstrand AudiologicInterviewToolBasedonICF
perceived as unclear or distorted. While external hearing aids et al. (20), the study employed a post-only design including
arethemostcommonlyprovidedhearinginterventionforthese structured reflections and a focus-group session. This study
patients,thisinterventionaloneisinsufficientasitdoesnotfully followed the evaluation criteria by Patton (21) to ensure
facilitateactivitiesofdailylivingforadultswithhearingloss(4). credibility of the research including, e.g., accurate methods
Becauseofthenatureofthishealthconditionandtheincreased for data collection and analysis, and sufficient descriptions
demands in society for sufficient hearing and communication, oftheresults.
individualconsequencesofhearingandcommunicationdeficits
may include reduced quality of life (5), pain in the head,
Participants and Setting
shoulders, and neck (6, 7), and fatigue (8), as well as reduced
The study was carried out at the Audiological Clinic in
abilitytowork(9)andtoparticipateinsocialactivities(10)thus
Region Örebro County, one of 21 counties in Sweden. This
leading to social isolation (11). Hence, many adults experience
is an umbrella clinic that provides broad audiological services,
hearinglossasverydisabling.
including aural habilitation and AR for children and adults,
Literature on adult audiologic rehabilitation (AR) published
respectively. The clinic is divided into three subunits, located
during the past 5 years has focused to a large extent on a
in three different cities within the region, that serve a
person-centeredperspective.Thisperspectiveacknowledgesthe
total of 307,000 inhabitants. Audiologists represent the largest
complexityofhearinglossandadvisestheuseofabio-psycho-
professional category of service providers at this clinic; these
social approach to person-centered AR (12). This represents
individuals usually practice AR independently. AR is typically
a significant shift from a more medically-focused AR and
provided in a series of three to five appointments with an
interventions focused primarily on the hearing impairment
audiologist. An individual interview is performed during the
to a more holistic view that targets interventions based on
first appointment. The audiologist then collaborates with the
functioning (i.e., bodily aspects, daily life activities, and the
patient to design a rehabilitation plan based on the outcomes
environmentofagivenindividual).
oftheinterview.
The International Classification of Functioning, Disability,
In the current study, four licensed audiologists employed
and Health (ICF) core sets for hearing loss were published in
at the aforementioned umbrella clinic performed individual
2013(13).Rigorousempiricalandliterature-basedevidence(14–
interviewswithARpatientsusingtheICF-basedinterviewtool.
17)wasusedtodeveloptwocoresets(comprehensiveandbrief)
The four audiologists have an average experience of 9.5 years
that included 117 and 27 categories, respectively. Because the
(range,1–16years).
ICF core sets for hearing loss address functioning, they have
contributed significantly to person-centered care and research
literature. The brief ICF core sets for hearing loss demonstrate ICF-Based Interview Tool
appropriatevalidityforuseininternationalsettings(18). The interview tool includes eight main areas of initial focus
Hearing health care in Sweden is taxpayer-funded. AR is based on ICF core sets for hearing loss that include physical
provided by licensed audiologists who are required to base health, psychological health, daily activities, communication,
their practice on state-of-the-art scientific knowledge (19). hearingissues,livinghabits,livingenvironment,andmotivation
Typically, AR in Sweden include provision of hearing aids torehabilitation.Therelationshipbetweentheseeightareasand
and assistive listening devices, and communication strategies the ICF categories are as shown in Table1. Of note, the tool
training. To enhance the person-centered focus in AR clinical featuredspecificICFcategoriesbutdidnotincludeICFcategory
encounters,Skagerstrandhasdevelopedaninterviewtool(2021, codes. A topic focused on “living habits” was implemented in
unpublished) based on the ICF core sets for hearing loss that theinterviewtoolbecauseoflegalaspectsandpreviousevidence
can be used by audiologists during the initial patient interview indicatingitsrelevance(22–25).
(see methods section). Given the premises for working as an
audiologistinSweden,thistoolisdesignedtoprovideascientific
Materials for Data Collection
basis for the content of the initial patient interview and ensure
Data were collected from both reflection protocols and a
thatallrelevantaspectsofindividualfunctioningarerecognized
groupinterview.
by the clinician. The information collected during the patient
interview will then be used to guide the audiologist toward
adequateandappropriateARinterventions. Reflection Protocol
The objective of this study was to explore the The reflection protocol was based on Gibbs’ reflective cycle
feasibility of this ICF-based interview tool by exploring model (26). This systematic reflection model presents a
its use by a sample group of audiologists engaged in framework for structured reflections on repeated experiences
AR-clinicalencounters. and permits the user to learn and evolve by identifying
aspects that were or were not effective in specific situations
and experiences. In addition to the reflection protocol, the
METHODS audiologists were asked to consider whether their current
professional training provided them with sufficient insight into
This work was designed as a feasibility study executed howtouseinterviewtooloriftheyrecognizedareasbeneficialfor
between February and April 2022. As recommended by Bowen additionaltraining.
FrontiersinRehabilitationSciences|www.frontiersin.org 2 July2022|Volume3|Article945464
GranbergandSkagerstrand AudiologicInterviewToolBasedonICF
TABLE1|AreasoftheICF-basedinterviewtoolandcorrespondingICFcategories.
Areas CorrespondingICFcategories
Physicalhealth
b210Seeingfunctions
b280Sensationofpain
b710Mobilityofjointfunctions
b780Sensationsrelatedtomusclesandmovementfunctions
e355Healthprofessionals*
e580Healthservices,systemsandpolicies*
Psychologicalhealth(includingmentalfunctions)
b126Temperamentandpersonalityfunctions
b140Attentionfunctions
b144Memoryfunctions
b152Emotionalfunctions
b164Higher-levelcognitivefunctions
d240Handlingstressandotherpsychologicaldemands
Dailyactivities
d740Formalrelationships
d750Informalrelationships
d830Highereducation
d850Remunerativeemployment
d910Communitylife
d920Recreationandleisure
Hearingissues
b230Hearingfunctions
b240Sensationsassociatedwithhearingandvestibularfunctions
Communication(includingfacilitating/hindering
environmentalfactors) d115Listening
d310Communicationwith-receiving-spokenmessages
d3503Conversingwithoneperson
d3504Conversingwithmanypeople
d3600Usingtelecommunicationdevices
d3602Usingcommunicationtechniques
e1250Generalproductsandtechnologyforcommunication
e1251Assistiveproductsandtechnologyforcommunication
e250Sound
e360Otherprofessionals(interpreters)
Livinghabits
b1300Energylevel
b134Sleepfunctions
d5701Managingdietandfitness
d5702Maintainingone’shealth
Livingenvironment
d760Familyrelationships
e310Immediatefamily
e315Extendedfamily
e325Acquaintances,peers,colleagues,neighborsandcommunity
e410Individualattitudesofimmediatefamilymembers
e425Individualattitudesofacquaintances,peers,colleagues,neighbors
andcommunity
e460Societalattitudes
Motivation PfMotivationtowardsAR
*Theimpactofhealthprofessionalsandhealthservices,systemsandpolicieswerespecificallyevaluatedinrelationtothepatientsoverallphysicalhealth.
Group Interview process.Thesessionlasted1hand34minandwasvoicerecorded
A group interview held with the participating audiologists bytwoseparatedevicestoenhancethesecurityandaccuracyof
focusedonfouraspects,including(a)theoverallexperiencewith thedatacollection.
theICF-basedinterviewtool,(b)thecontentofthetool,(c)the
reflections and the reflection protocol, and (d) rehabilitation Procedure
plansandinterventions.
The study was carried out in three phases, a
Thegroupinterviewwasmoderatedbythefirstauthor(SG);
pre-implementation phase, an implementation phase, and a
thesecondauthor(ÅS)tooknotesandassistedwiththeinterview
post-implementationphase.
FrontiersinRehabilitationSciences|www.frontiersin.org 3 July2022|Volume3|Article945464
GranbergandSkagerstrand AudiologicInterviewToolBasedonICF
The pre-implementation phase provided education to the
audiologistswhowereparticipatingintheproject.Theeducation
providedincludedlecturesfocusedontheprinciplesofICF,the
ICFcoresets,andthespecificcontentoftheICF-basedinterview
tool.Theeducationalsofocusedoninterviewskills,includinga
generaldiscussionofhowtoperformperson-centeredinterviews
aswellasthecontentanduseofthereflectionprotocol.
During the implementation phase, the audiologists carried
out individual interviews of patients in AR using the ICF-
basedinterviewtool.Eachpatientsessionincludedaninterview,
rehabilitationplanning,and,oncethepatienthadleft,reflections
based on the reflection protocol and written notes placed in
the patient’s medical chart. After each patient interview, the
audiologist posted written reflections in a secure data map
maintained by the clinic that could be accessed only by the
participating audiologists and the authors of the study. The
fouraudiologistscompleted25individualinterviewsduringthe
FIGURE1|Overviewofoverarchingthemeswithsub-themes.
periodofinvestigation.
The group interview was held post-implementation after
all the patient interviews were completed and all reflections
posted.Thefouraudiologistsandthetwoauthorsofthisstudy Information
participatedinthegroupinterview.
The general opinion among the audiologists was that they
were able to collect deep and important information from
Analysis
each patient that might not have surfaced in the absence of
Alldatawereevaluatedbyqualitativethematicanalysis(27).The
this interview tool. The audiologists also identified two major
analysis included six specific steps that involved (1) reviewing
obstacles. First, they reported unfamiliarity what “to do” with
the entire dataset, (2) generating initial codes, (3) searching
all the information. Examples of these issues included patient
for themes, (4) reviewing the chosen themes, (5) defining and
reportsofsmoking,sleep,anddiet;theaudiologistsreportedthat
namingthethemes,and(6)generatingthereport.
it was difficult to discuss these health concerns while focusing
The first author (SG) performed steps 1 and 2 as part
on hearing loss. However, during the group interview, the
of the analysis of the recorded interview. The second author
four audiologists collectively determined ways that they might
(ÅS) performed steps 1 and 2 as part of the analysis of the
addressthesematterswiththeirpatientsandagreeduponseveral
reflectionprotocols.Thedatafromthereflectionprotocolsand
solutions.Theyconcludedthatdiscussionsoftheseaspectswith
theinterviewwerethenmergedandsteps3–6wereconductedin
thepatientfrequentlyledtotheirimprovedunderstandingofthe
collaborationbetweenthetwoauthors.
complexities of living with hearing loss. The audiologists also
Inadditiontothethematicanalysis,thetwoauthorsprovided
noted the lack of routines for referral of the patients to other
a joint general assessment of the outcomes of the reflection
healthcareprofessionalsand/orhowtomanagerelevantaspects
protocols. This assessment focused specifically on the learning
of patient care that did not relate specifically to the practice of
curve,i.e.,whetherprogressionregardingtheuseoftheinterview
theaudiology.
instrumentandprotocolforpatientsinARcouldbedetected.
As a second obstacle, the audiologists reported difficulties
in managing some of the patients’ emotional responses to
Ethics
discussions of living with hearing loss. They reported that they
This study followed “Good research practice” outlined by the
didnotknowhowto“stop”patientsatanappropriateplacein
Swedish Research Council. However, as this project did not
thesediscussions.Oneofthemsaid:
collectsensitivepersonalinformation,noformalapprovalfrom
anethicscommitteewasrequired(28). ...oneofmypatientsopenedupalot...Ihaddifficultiestomeet
thisinformation...aheavysession...afterwardsIthought,Icannot
RESULTS workthisway,Ifeeltotallydrained...
Patient Participation
The two overarching themes with specific relevance to
feasibility emerged from the data analysis, including process- The audiologists note that they realized rather quickly that it
related and structure-related factors; both included several was helpful to educate the patients by sharing the pre-printed
sub-themes(Figure1). figurethatoutlinedtheuseoftheinterviewtool.Thepre-printed
circle-typefigureincludedcontentintheinterviewtoolinaform
Process-Related Factors thatwouldfacilitateitsusebytheaudiologists.Accordingtothe
Process-related factors include sub-themes that focus on the audiologists,thepatientsrespondedpositivelytothispedagogic
interactionbetweenpatientsandtheaudiologists. activity, as it permitted them to follow the progression of the
FrontiersinRehabilitationSciences|www.frontiersin.org 4 July2022|Volume3|Article945464
GranbergandSkagerstrand AudiologicInterviewToolBasedonICF
interview and return to previous themes to provide additional especially those that highlighted physical health, psychological
information.Theaudiologistshighlightedthattheywereableto health, and factors related to lifestyle. As noted above, they
provideabetterunderstandingoftheholisticviewofhearingloss felt unable to respond appropriately to the patient narratives
topatientsengagedinthisdeepertypeofinterview. and to provide adequate advice regarding the psychological
aspects of hearing loss. They also struggled to identify the
...a patient might wonder, “what has this to do with my
appropriate“level”ofinformation.Thiswasofparticularconcern
hearing”andthenIexplained,andwediscussed.Iusuallydonot
for questions regarding physical health as many patients were
dothis,Imeanexplainsodeeply,butnowwhenIdo,theyclearly
eager to share detailed information. Nevertheless, they clearly
openupandthedialogbetweenusbecomegood...
realizedtheimportanceofthisinformation.Oneaudiologistsaid:
The audiologists stated clearly that the interview tool
...I had a patient who recently had learned that XXX had
enhanced patient participation because of its holistic content.
[another diagnosis] and I asked whether this was the right time
They noted that several patients reported that the audiologists
to engage in AR given that it takes lots of energy and dedication
listened to their concerns, presented a more in-depth
toadapttohearingaids.IofferedXXXtothinkaboutitandwe
understanding of their current life situation, and met their
bookedanew appointment, butIwasveryclearthat XXXmust
narrativesadequately.
consider what health condition to deal with first and to call me
andrescheduleshouldXXXnothavethestrengthtodealwiththe
Rehabilitation
hearingrightnow...
The audiologists reported that the additional information
obtained from the patients did not result in any extended AR
Structure-Related Factors
beyondhearingaidsandinterventionsrelatedtocommunication
Structure-related factors include the context of, and aspects
and that the rehabilitation plans formulated in collaboration
relatedto,theconditionsneededtocarryoutAR.
with the patients were largely the same as those generated
before initiating the project. One audiologist explained that Organization
the generated plan was based on the professional focus, i.e.,
OneconcernnotedbytheaudiologistswasthatARwasevaluated
primarily hearing technology and communication strategies.
clinicallybythenumberofpatientsandthenumberofhearing
Thisinterestingfindingrevealedsomeuncertaintyregardingthe
aidprescriptionsprovidedovertimeandnotbymeasurements
full nature of a rehabilitation plan and the information that
that assess the quality of their work. They argued that these
it should contain. It was clear that the audiologists did not
issuescomplicatedtheireffortstoprovideperson-centeredcare.
fullyunderstandthattheiradvicetopatients,recommendations,
Likewise, while they reported previous positive experiences
and patient support were extremely important aspects of the
with patient follow-ups (typically within 6–12 months after
rehabilitation program that served to empower patients and
completionoftheARintervention),thesetypesofappointments
facilitatetheirdailylives.Whendiscussingthispointduringthe
havebeendiscouragedbythepresentorganizationbecauseofthe
interview,allfouraudiologistsagreedthattheyareengagedina
longwaitinglistsforpatientsinneedofprimaryhearinghealth
greatdealofrehabilitationworkthatisultimatelynotdisclosed
care. The audiologists reported that follow-ups are important
inrehabilitationplansand/orpresentedinmedicalrecords.They
for most patients as it facilitates reinforcement of critical
agreedthatiftheyhaddocumentedeverythingthattheyactually
information, communication strategies, and the handling of
haddoneduringthepatientvisit,therewouldbeabettermatch
technical aids. They also agreed that, in the absence of patient
betweentheinformationcollectedduringtheinterviewsandthe
follow-up visits, it becomes difficult to evaluate the outcome
documented rehabilitation plan. They also agreed that because
andthequalityoftheprimaryinterventionsandtoevaluatethe
thedocumentwiththerehabilitationplanisavailabletopatients
overallimpactofAR.
during the entire rehabilitation period, the inclusion of topics
discussed in the interview (i.e., sleep habits, rest, and recovery) ...Ithinkitisuseful[follow-ups]becauseonecanreallygrasp
wouldprovidethepatientswithimportantcuesandreminders. what[inAR]thathavebeenabsorbedbythepatientsandwhatwe
They also noted that it is important to provide more complete havetoworkwithfurther...
documentation of patient care provided in the clinic so this
information would be available for professional evaluation by Time
managementandoversightboards. Although the audiologists considered the interview tool
beneficial for patient interviews, there were some concerns
Content about time requirements. The ICF-based interviews were more
Theaudiologistsreportedthatitwaseasytodiscussthecontent in-depth and thus they were more time-consuming, both with
oftheinterviewtoolwiththepatientastheinformationprovided respect to direct patient interaction and documentation of
closely resembled the “common view” of hearing loss as it findings in the medical record. The audiologists report that
focusedonhearing,hearingcomorbidities,communication,and they are time-limited in their regular daily work due to the
thelivingsituation.Theyalsoreportedthatthepatientshadno number of aspects and tasks that need to be fulfilled for each
troublewhenaskedtodiscussthesematters.Bycontrast,allfour patient and at each appointment. This was identified as a
audiologists struggled with aspects of the interview that were significanthindrancetoperson-centeredARwithinthecurrent
related to hearing loss but that did not fit the “common view,” organizationalstructure.Asstatedbyoneoftheaudiologists:
FrontiersinRehabilitationSciences|www.frontiersin.org 5 July2022|Volume3|Article945464
GranbergandSkagerstrand AudiologicInterviewToolBasedonICF
...peoplehavemoreproblemstoday,wehavemoretechnology demonstrated an overlap between categories in the brief ICF
to give information about, it is not just the interview, but we core sets for hearing loss and information in medical records
inform about hearing aids, compatibilities between hearing aids (29). Hence, the interview tool in the current study might also
andcellphonesetc.Ittakesalotoftimetoseeiftheycanhandle be useful for audiologists who do not have access to medical
it[thetechnology],thepatientsexpectustodomore[concerning recordsbutwishestoworkholisticallyinAR.Multiplefunctional
technology].Thattakestime... aspects may be associated with hearing loss in adults (30) and
can have a broad impact on patients living with hearing loss.
Additional Training
Furthermore, many of these aspects need to be included in
Questionsinthereflectiontoolrevealedtheneedforadditional the AR program to empower the patients and facilitate their
training. The audiologists reported the need for both informal activitiesofdailyliving.ICFhasbeenacknowledgedwidelyinthe
collegial interactions as well as more formal training sessions. literatureasaholisticframeworkthatfacilitatesperson-centered
The audiologists noted that they did not have the opportunity AR. Numerous studies have concluded that a holistically based
toengageinstructuredcollegialdiscussionsthatmightprovide view such as that provided by ICF is necessary to address all
insightsonhowtomanagethedailyassignmentsmosteffectively. relevant aspects of adult hearing loss in AR (4, 12, 29, 31).
They also raised the need for improved knowledge regarding Saunders et al. [(32), p. S86] concluded that a “redefinition of
ways to respond to cognitive and psychological issues and therapeuticgoalsettingandhearingoutcomestoincludeaspects
how to address the specific needs of patients who remain in ofwell-beingsothataudiologistscancaptureandpatientsrealize
theworkforce. that good hearing outcomes can have a direct positive impact
onaperson’squalityoflifethatextendsbeyondtheirimproved
Learning Curve
abilitytohear”willbenecessaryforclinicalpracticetofacilitate
The interview tool appears to be beneficial as it enhances the well-being and healthy living. The audiologists participating in
nature and quality of the initial patient interview. The findings this study worked in a person-centered way, and thus, could
suggest that improved structure and flow of the interviews incorporatetheICF-basedinterviewtoolintheirdailypractices.
were achieved; the analysis of the structured reflections also All four audiologists highlighted patient participation as a core
demonstrated improvement over time. When first introduced, outcome of this project. Consequently, we can conclude that
the new interview format was stressful for the audiologists. the interview tool promoted a holistic view aligned with both
However,overtime,theaudiologistsbecamemoreconfidentin person-centered AR and a major aim of ICF, i.e., to be used as
their skills and were able to focus on the information provided aconceptualbasisfordisabilityandhealth(33).
bythepatientratherthantheinterviewtoolitself.Furthermore, The interview tool was based on the ICF core set for
the reflections revealed a change in the depth of information hearing loss with the addition of questions focused on lifestyle
gathered from each patient. As the audiologists became more factors. This addition was made in accordance with Swedish
experienced with the interview tool, they noted that it became regulations that require professional health care providers to
easier to address patient concerns in-depth and to cover more acknowledgelifestylefactorsandtheirroleinimprovinghealth
areas that may be relevant to the AR process. One interesting (23).Theaudiologistsparticipatinginthisprojectreportedsome
observation was the change in the way audiologists used the difficulties with these questions, due to inexperience with the
interview tool. At the beginning of the trial, it was perceived routines of the referral process. This finding suggests that they
as a tool for the audiologists only; by the end of the project, mayneedtoidentifypossibilitiestoexploreandincorporatenew
many of the audiologists shared this tool in collaboration with researchfindingsaspartoftheirdailywork.
thepatients.
Organizational Aspects That Facilitate
DISCUSSION
Implementation of the ICF Based
The current project evaluated the feasibility of an ICF-based Interview-Tool
interviewtooltoenhanceperson-centeredAR.Thedataanalysis Santana et al. (34) described several fundamental aspects of
supportstheuseofthistoolinclinicalencounterswithpatients person-centered care that relate specifically to structures and
inneedofAR. organizations.Organizationsandmanagementplaycriticalroles
in establishing policies and practices and fostering a person-
Use of ICF to Ensure a Holistic View for
centered work climate among the health care providers and
Patients in AR staff. The audiologists participating in this project were not
The interview tool developed for this project featured content aware of any policies or practices that were directly related
from the ICF Core sets for hearing loss but not the numerical to person-centered care nor were these qualities considered in
codes. The use of these codes requires a medical record system their professional evaluations. This arrangement is clearly in
thatfacilitatestheuseofkeywordsrelatedtothesecodesaswell conflict with person-centered ideas and practices. Thus, when
as in-depth knowledge that is not currently provided to most implementingtheICF-basedinterviewtool,onemustalsofocus
trained audiologists. However, the interview tool based on the on the concerns of management and the overall organization.
principlesofICFensureaholisticviewofpatientfunction.This Themanagementhasthepowerandtheresponsibilitytocreate
finding is in line with the results from a previous study that structuresthatfacilitateperson-centeredAR.Santanaetal.also
FrontiersinRehabilitationSciences|www.frontiersin.org 6 July2022|Volume3|Article945464
GranbergandSkagerstrand AudiologicInterviewToolBasedonICF
remind us that changes in the health care curriculum do not resulted in comprehensive patient narratives that guided the
automatically result in cultural changes within a given clinic. audiologists with their rehabilitation planning. Our findings
These findings suggest that change cannot be implemented revealedthattheaudiologistsusedconceptsofperson-centered
by single health care professionals; all staff members must be careandthattheICF-basedtoolfacilitatedtheseefforts.Tofully
involvedtoachievesuccess. implementthistoolintoclinicalpractice,managementstaffmay
needtoreorganizeARtofosteraperson-centeredcultureamong
Structured Reflections
cliniciansandhealthcarestaff.
The progressive facility using the interview tool was clearly
related to increased audiologist familiarity and confidence.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
These findings suggest that, when implementing the use of an
interviewtool,itisusefultoincludeatrainingperiodinvolving
The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be
structured reflections. Structured reflections provide the user
madeavailablebytheauthors,withoutunduereservation.
with the tools needed to learn and evolve (26). This type of
activity provides essential contributions to those engaged in
ETHICS STATEMENT
professional development and learning. Similarly, a structured
implementation, as shown in this project, may be necessary
Ethical review and approval was not required for the study
to support the successful use of new interventions and work
on human participants in accordance with the local legislation
habits(35,36).Ourresultsclearlydemonstratethataudiologists
and institutional requirements. Written informed consent for
have both the need and desire to improve their knowledge
participationwasnotrequiredforthisstudyinaccordancewith
base. This desire is probably not unique to this group or this
thenationallegislationandtheinstitutionalrequirements.
clinical setting and is more likely to be a sign of increasingly
complex needs within the area of hearing health care. The
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
field of audiology is undergoing constant evolution with needs
that may be met by ongoing updates designed specifically for
Allauthorslistedhavemadeasubstantial,direct,andintellectual
audiologyprofessionals.
contributiontotheworkandapproveditforpublication.
CONCLUSION
FUNDING
The current study explored the feasibility of an ICF-based
ThisprojectwasfundedbytheDepartmentofAudiologyandthe
interview tool for use in patients in need of AR. The two
FacultyofMedicineandHealth,ÖrebroUniversity,Örebro.
overarching themes identified focused on process-related and
structure-related factors. Our analysis revealed that the use of
thisinterviewtoolenhancedperson-centeredcareinclinicalAR ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
encounters.Theaudiologistshighlightedthatthetoolfacilitated
patient participation and thus promoted a core concept of Theauthorsacknowledgetheparticipatingaudiologistsfortheir
person-centeredcare.TheuseoftheICF-basedholisticapproach significantcontributionsinthisproject.
REFERENCES
impairment: a phenomenographic study. Int J Audiol. (2015) 54:873–
80.doi:10.3109/14992027.2015.1060640
1. WorldHealthOrganization.WorldReportonHearing.WHO(2021). 9. Hogan A, O’Loughlin K, Davis A, Kendig H. Hearing loss and paid
2. Margolis RH, Saly GL. Distribution of hearing loss employment: Australian population survey findings. Int J Audiol. (2009)
characteristics in a clinical population. Ear Hear. (2008) 29:524– 48:117–22.doi:10.1080/14992020802449008
32.doi:10.1097/AUD.0b013e3181731e2e 10. Manchaiah VKC, Stephens D. Perspectives on defining ‘hearing
3. MichelsTC,DuffyMT,RogersDJ.Hearinglossinadults:differentialdiagnosis loss’ and its consequences. Hear Balance Commun. (2013)
andtreatment.AmFamPhysician.(2019)100:98–108. 11:6–16.doi:10.3109/21695717.2012.756624
4. Boothroyd A. Aural rehabilitation as comprehensive hearing 11. HeffernanE,WithanachchiCM,FergusonMA.‘Theworsemyhearinggot,
health care. Perspectives ASHA Spec Interest Groups. (2017) thelesssociableIgot’:aqualitativestudyofpatientandprofessionalviews
2:31–8.doi:10.1044/persp2.SIG7.31 ofthemanagementofsocialisolationandhearingloss.AgeAgeing.(2022)
5. Chia E-M, Wang JJ, Rochtchina E, Cumming RR, Newall P, 51:1–10.doi:10.1093/ageing/afac019
Mitchell P. Hearing impairment and health-related quality 12. Ferguson M, Maidment D, Henshaw H, Heffernan E. Evidence-
of life: the blue mountains hearing study. Ear Hear. (2007) based interventions for adult aural rehabilitation: that was then,
28:187–95.doi:10.1097/AUD.0b013e31803126b6 this is now. Semin Hear. (2019) 40:68–84. doi: 10.1055/s-0038-16
6. Danermark B, Coniavitis Gellerstedt L. Psychosocial work 76784
environment, hearing impairment and health. Int J Audiol. (2004) 13. DanermarkB,GranbergS,KramerSE,SelbM,MöllerC.Thecreationofa
43:383–9.doi:10.1080/14992020400050049 comprehensiveandabriefcoresetforhearinglossusingtheinternational
7. Coniavitis Gellerstedt L, Danermark B. Hearing impairment, classificationoffunctioning,disabilityandhealth.AmJAudiol.(2013)22:323–
working life conditions, and gender. Scand J Disabil Res. (2004) 8.doi:10.1044/1059-0889(2013/12-0052)
6:225–45.doi:10.1080/15017410409512654 14. Granberg S, Dahlström J, Möller C, Kahari K, Danermark B.
8. Hua H, Carlsson AA, Widén S, Möller C, Lyxell B. Conceptions The ICF core sets for hearing loss–researcher perspective. Part I:
of working life among employees with mild-moderate aided hearing systematic review of outcome measures identified in audiological
FrontiersinRehabilitationSciences|www.frontiersin.org 7 July2022|Volume3|Article945464
GranbergandSkagerstrand AudiologicInterviewToolBasedonICF
research. Int J Audiol. (2014) 53:65–76. doi: 10.3109/14992027.2013.8 28. The Swedish Research Council. Good Research Practice. (2017). Available
51799 online at: https://www.vr.se/english/analysis/reports/our-reports/2017-08-
15. Granberg S, Möller K, Skagerstrand A, Möller C, Danermark B. 31-good-research-practice.html(accessedJune6,2022).
The ICF core sets for hearing loss: researcher perspective, Part 29. Alfakir R, van Leeuwen LM, Pronk M, Kramer SE, Zapala DA.
II: Linking outcome measures to the International Classification Comparing the international classification of functioning, disability,
of Functioning, disability and health (ICF). Int J Audiol. (2014) and health core sets for hearing loss and otorhinolaryngology/audiology
53:77–87.doi:10.3109/14992027.2013.858279 intake documentation at mayo clinic. Ear Hear. (2019) 40:858–
16. GranbergS,PronkM,SwanepoeldeW,KramerSE,HagstenH,Hjaldahl 69doi:10.1097/AUD.0000000000000662
J, et al. The ICF core sets for hearing loss project: functioning and 30. Granberg S. Functioning and Disability in Adults With Hearing Loss :
disability from the patient perspective. Int J Audiol. (2014) 53:777– Preparatory Studies in the ICF Core Sets for Hearing Loss Project. Örebro:
86.doi:10.3109/14992027.2014.938370 ÖrebroUniversity(2015).
17. GranbergS,SwanepoeldeW,EnglundU,MollerC,DanermarkB.TheICF 31. Boothroyd A. Adult aural rehabilitation: what is it and does it
coresetsforhearinglossproject:Internationalexpertsurveyonfunctioning work? Trends Amplif. (2007) 11:63–71. doi: 10.1177/10847138073
anddisabilityofadultswithhearinglossusingtheinternationalclassification 01073
of functioning, disability, and health (ICF). Int J Audiol. (2014) 53:497– 32. Saunders GH, Vercammen C, Timmer BHB, Singh G, Pelosi A, Meis
506.doi:10.3109/14992027.2014.900196 M, et al. Changing the narrative for hearing health in the broader
18. Karlsson E, Mäki-Torkko E, Widén S, Gustafsson J, Manchaiah V, context of healthy living: a call to action. Int J Audiol. (2021) 60:86–
Mahomed-Asmail F, et al. Validation of the Bbrief International 91.doi:10.1080/14992027.2021.1905892
Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) 33. World Health Organization. International Classification of Functioning,
core set for hearing loss: an international multicentre study. DisabilityandHealth:ICF.Geneva:WHO(2001).
Int J Audiol. (2021) 60:412–20. doi: 10.1080/14992027.2020.18 34. Santana MJ, Manalili K, Jolley RJ, Zelinsky S, Quan H, Lu M. How to
46088 practiceperson-centredcare:aconceptualframework.HealthExpect.(2018)
19. Brännström KJ, Båsjö S, Larsson J, Lood S, Lundå S, Notsten M, et al. 21:429–40.doi:10.1111/hex.12640
PsychosocialworkenvironmentamongSwedishaudiologists.IntJAudiol. 35. Hunter JR, Chandran TM, Asmall S, Tucker JM, Ravhengani NM,
(2013)52:151–61.doi:10.3109/14992027.2012.743045 MokgalagadiY.TheidealclinicinSouthAfrica:progressandchallengesin
20. Bowen DJ, Kreuter M, Spring B, Cofta-Woerpel L, Linnan L, Weiner D, implementation.SAfrHealthRev.(2017)1:111–23.
et al. How we design feasibility studies. Am J Prev Med. (2009) 36:452– 36. Stevens AB, Strasser DC, Uomoto J, Bowen SE, Falconer JA. Utility
457.doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2009.02.002 of treatment implementation methods in clinical trial with rehabilitation
21. PattonMQ.QualitativeResearch&EvaluationMethods:IntegratingTheory teams. J Rehabil Res Dev. (2007) 44:537–46. doi: 10.1682/JRRD.2006.0
andPractice.4thed.ThousandOaks,CA:SAGEPublications,Inc.(2015). 9.0120
22. DawesP,CruickshanksKJ,MooreDR,Edmondson-JonesM,McCormack
A, Fortnum H, et al. Cigarette smoking, passive smoking, alcohol ConflictofInterest:Theauthorsdeclarethattheresearchwasconductedinthe
consumption, and hearing loss. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. (2014) 15:663– absenceofanycommercialorfinancialrelationshipsthatcouldbeconstruedasa
74.doi:10.1007/s10162-014-0461-0 potentialconflictofinterest.
23. GoderieTPM,StamM,Lissenberg-WitteBI,MerkusP,LemkeU,SmitsC,et
al.10-yearfollow-upresultsofthenetherlandslongitudinalstudyonhearing: Publisher’sNote:Allclaimsexpressedinthisarticlearesolelythoseoftheauthors
trendsoflongitudinalchangeinspeechrecognitioninnoise.EarHear.(2020) anddonotnecessarilyrepresentthoseoftheiraffiliatedorganizations,orthoseof
41:491–9.doi:10.1097/AUD.0000000000000780
thepublisher,theeditorsandthereviewers.Anyproductthatmaybeevaluatedin
24. HughesML,RodriguezAI,HatchJ,ZouchaK.Hearingandvestibularloss
thisarticle,orclaimthatmaybemadebyitsmanufacturer,isnotguaranteedor
with misuseofopioids and illicit drugs: a review of the literature. Audiol
endorsedbythepublisher.
Neurotol.(2022)1–11.doi:10.1159/000521965
25. NationalBoardofHealthandWelfare.NationellaindikationerförGodVård
[Nationalindicationsforgoodhealthcare].(2009).Retrievedfrom:https:// Copyright © 2022 Granberg and Skagerstrand. This is an open-access article
www.socialstyrelsen.se/globalassets/sharepoint-dokument/artikelkatalog/ distributedunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttributionLicense(CCBY).
nationella-riktlinjer/2009-11-5.pdf(accessedMay24,2022). Theuse,distributionorreproductioninotherforumsispermitted,providedthe
26. Gibbs G. Learning by Doing: A Guide to Teaching and Learning Methods. original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
Oxford:FurtherEducationUnit,Polytechnic(1988). publicationinthisjournaliscited,inaccordancewithacceptedacademicpractice.
27. BraunV,ClarkeV.Usingthematicanalysisinpsychology.QualResPsychol. Nouse,distributionorreproductionispermittedwhichdoesnotcomplywiththese
(2006)3:77–101.doi:10.1191/1478088706qp063oa terms.
FrontiersinRehabilitationSciences|www.frontiersin.org 8 July2022|Volume3|Article945464