Feature Title Description Initial Prioritisation Implemented Reason for not implementing
within
project
1 Freetext search of criteria It should be possible to search for criteria using a free text search. medium Yes
2 Display results of freetext search - Results of a freetext search should be displayed as the user types and it medium Yes
autosuggester + filter by ontology should be possible to filter the results by the main categories of the ontology.
3 Ontology-Tree search It should be possible to search for criteria in an hierachical ontology tree high Yes
based on clinical vocabulary.
4 Ability to create Boolean expressions It should be possible to combine criteria in logical boolean expressions using high Yes
AND and OR.
5 Negation of Boolean expressions on Single Criteria should be negatable for each criterion. high No Was implemented using the concept of Exclusion criteria instead, as this is
criterion level the natural way to describe research studies. A negation of single criteria is
then not neccessary. Further it is easier to implement in FHIR Search and
potentially improves performance as the exclusion of a specific condition
w ill return less results than the result of a :not filter.
6 Negation of Boolean expressions on Single Criteria should be negatable on a group level. high Yes
group level
7 Context of the Boolean expression The context of a query has to be considered. Potential contexts would be high Yes/No Only the patient context was implemented, due to the complexity multiple
patient, encounter, or measurement-series. contexts would create. Further contexts could be considered in future
p rojects.
8 Check for the existence of a criterion It should be possible to only check if a criterion exists for a patient without high Yes
(e.g. Diagnosis) specifying a specific value.
9 Filter criterion value - value set- small Some criteria have values from a value set (e.g. "positiv" / "negativ" result for high Yes
a test). These should be selectable.
10 Filter criterion value - value set- large Some criteria have values from larger value sets - like the bodysite of a low No We identified very few cirteria where this is relevant and therefore
Specimen. For this a search filter should be included in the user interface to prioritised other features.
make selecting value concepts easier.
11 Filter criterion value - numeric Numeric criteria like laboratory values should be supported. high Yes
12 Filter criterion by time restriction it should be possible to restrict the time within which a criterion lies. high No Moved to to the next phase of the project given resource constraints.
13 Multiple filters on one criterion Filters accross multiple fields of the same criterion (FHIR Resource) should be medium No Moved to to the next phase of the project given resource constraints.
supported. Further, most criteria do not require multiple filters.
14 Direct relationships between It should be possible to put multiple criteria into a direct relationship. For medium No Complexity of implementation and potential impact on performance.
resources example bio specimen for a particular diagnosis. Further, the ability to implement this strongly depends on the data, which
means that it might not be possible to implement this accross all criteria.
15 Functional (calculated) criteria Support for functional criteria, which are calculated based on the data as the low No Complexity of implementation as each functional criterion would have to be
request is sent. For example: The age of a patient based on his birthdate at defined and implemented individually.
the time of execution.
16 Simple and advanced search It should be possible to switch between a simple and advanced search view to low No Moved to next phase as our first prototype needed to be assessed and
reduce the barriers of entry for new users. evaluated before developing this concept further. Additionally some of the
more complex features were not implemented yet, which makes different
s earch types less important.
17 Select a group of criteria, if of the It should be supported to select a group of criteria, if they are of the same medium Yes
same type type. For example the selection of all types of diabetes.
18 Put groups of criteria into a time It should be possible to put criteria in a time relationship. For example criteria low No Complexity of implementation, potential impact on performance.
relationship x and y happened within 3 month of criterion z.