DOI: 10.53020/IME-2024-KSZ-101
Secondary use of health data in the EU:
Exploring the legal challenges of the upcoming European Health
Data Space Regulation in light of the findings of the TEHDAS project
Az egészségügyi adatok másodlagos használata az EU-ban:
Az európai egészségügyi adattér rendelet kapcsán felmerülő jogi kihívások
a TEHDAS közös fellépés eredményeinek tükrében
Krisztina Davidovics1,2 ✉, Réka Kovács1, Péter András Gaál1,2
1Semmelweis University Health Services Management Training Centre, Budapest
2Hungarian Healthcare Management Association, Budapest
✉
davidovics.krisztina@emk.semmelweis.hu
Since the end of the 2010s, the use of advanced ICT basis can be decisive. Overall, the EHDS might be a
solutions, the analysis of big data and advanced algo- regulation that can challenge the current legal paradigm
rithm-based data processing have become dominant of competence distribution among the EU and the
technologies in almost every domain. In the health sec- Member States regarding digital transition, including
tor, this process was also fuelled by the COVID-19 pan- data usage in health care. As for the citizens’ empower-
demic. The fast proliferation of digital solutions and the ment, the goal of an EU-wide ecosystem of health data
efforts to regulate their development and application utilisation requires individuals who are aware of the
regulations, draw the attention to the problems raised by economic value of their health data and, via practising
both the primary and the secondary use of electronic altruism, want to share these data also to be used for the
health data. There is an ongoing comprehensive regula- common good. Specific provisions of the EHDS, such as
tory effort in the European Union to address these chal- the right to data portability or the option for opt-out, are
lenges. Regarding the health sector, the European Health definitely for the empowerment of citizens, but can also
Data Space Regulation can be considered a flagship reduce the potential health care-related benefits of data
legislation. The main ambition of the European Com- utilisation at both individual and population level.
mission is, on the one hand, to create a common space Altogether, a concert of requirements should be fulfilled
where natural persons can easily control their electronic for meaningful citizens’ participation, engagement, and
health data and, on the other hand, to make it possible practice of data altruism, supported by the complex
for researchers, innovators and policymakers to use interplay of the relevant regulations.
these health data sets for common societal purposes
in a trusted and secure way, based on a specific Keywords: European Health Data Space Regulation,
cross-border digital infrastructure. With 25 participating secondary use of data, legal barriers, citizens’ empowerment,
countries, a European Union project, the Joint Action data altruism
Towards the European Health Data Space (TEHDAS) has
been initiated to support the establishment of the EHDS A 2010-es évek vége óta szinte minden területen meg-
regarding the secondary use of data. határozóvá vált a fejlett ICT-megoldások használata, a
On the basis of the analysis of the outputs of the nagy adatok (big data) feldolgozásával, illetve az algorit-
TEHDAS project and the available regulatory documents musok bevonásával megvalósuló adatelemzés. A COVID-
and legislative proposals, our study identified and 19 pandémia – minden negatívuma mellett – az egész-
addressed two important topics: legislative barriers to ségügyben a digitális megoldások és szabályozások
the secondary use of health data and challenges for egyik jelentős motorjává vált, ami ráirányította a figyel-
citizens’ empowerment, including data altruism. The met az elsődleges és másodlagos adathasználat proble-
legal complexity of the ongoing strategic legislative ini- matikájára. Az Európai Unió szabályozási válasza ezen
tiatives in the EU poses several challenges for future kihívások kezelésére egy átfogó jogalkotási csomag
application. Firstly, there can be a terminological prob- kidolgozása lett, a digitalizáció és az adathasznosítás
lem due to the lack of a common definition of secondary stratégiai megközelítésének szellemében. Az egészség-
use of data. Secondly, the regulation of the Member ügyi ágazatot illetően az előkészítés alatt álló európai
States adjusted to their national health and data utilisa- egészségügyi adattér rendelet (EHDS) tekinthető kiemelt
tion systems can be diverse. Both of these may hinder jelentőségű jogszabálynak. Az Európai Bizottság fő tö-
the desired EU-level harmonisation regarding data- rekvése ezen új ágazatspecifikus szabályozással össze-
sharing. In this context, the division of regulatory com- tett. Egy olyan közös keretrendszer létrehozását tervezi,
petencies related to health care and the chosen legal amely lehetővé teszi az egyének (páciensek) számára az
IME – EGÉSZSÉGÜGYI VEZETŐK SZAKLAPJA – TUDOMÁNYOS FOLYÓIRAT XXIII. ÉVFOLYAM 2024/1. DIGITÁLIS KÜLÖNSZÁM 5
DIGITÁLIS EGÉSZSÉGÜGY ADATBIZTONSÁG SZAKCIKK
elektronikus egészségügyi adataik kezelésének kontrol- INTRODUCTION
lálását. A szabályozás további kiemelt célja, hogy a kuta-
tási projektek, innovációs törekvések és a szakpolitikai The secondary analysis of routinely generated data is a
programalkotás számára hozzáférhetővé tegye az egész- well-established research method to implement studies with
ségügyi adatkészleteket. Ezen célok megbízható megva- relatively low cost. The fast pace development of information
lósítását, a tervezet szerint, egy speciális, biztonságos and communication technologies (ICT) has triggered the digi-
és uniós szinten egységes digitális infrastruktúra kiala- talisation of virtually all aspects of our modern life, which in
kítása hivatott szavatolni, amelynek megvalósítását egy turn has started to generate oceans of a wide variety of data
25 ország részvételével zajló uniós projekt, az európai with the potential for secondary analysis to fuel technological
egészségügyi adattér felé irányuló közös fellépés (TEH- and societal innovation and development at a cost and scale,
DAS) is támogatja a másodlagos adathasználat tekinte- never seen before in human history. The emergence of arti-
tében. ficial intelligence applications is one example of this new
A TEHDAS projekt eredményeinek és az elérhető jog- innovation age. Arguably, the data available for secondary
szabálytervezetek szövegének elemzésén alapuló tanul- use have become the most important new and invaluable
mányunkban az egészségügyi adatok másodlagos fel- resource in all sectors of the economy, and health care is no
használásának jogszabályi akadályait, valamint az állam- exception.
polgárok szerepének erősítését ‒ beleértve az adataltru- The secondary use (or reuse) of data in health care has
izmust ‒ vettük górcső alá. Az EU-n belül folyamatban great potential to improve the performance of health systems,
lévő stratégiai jogalkotási kezdeményezések összetett- which is underlined by the large number of recent publica -
sége számos kihívás elé állítja a jövőbeni jogalkalma- tions addressing the topic [1]. The key to unlocking this poten-
zást. Először is terminológiai jogértelmezési kérdések tial is to make these data, generated by the routine operation
vetődhetnek fel az adatok másodlagos felhasználására of health services, available for research and policy making,
vonatkozó egyéges fogalommeghatározás hiánya okán. including technological and societal innovations, but the
Másodszor, a tagállamok nemzeti egészségügyi és adat- secondary use of health data also exemplifies its main diffi-
hasznosítási rendszereihez igazodó szabályozása sok- culty. Patient (and as a matter of fact any other personal) data
rétű lehet. Mindkét jelenség akadályozhatja az adatmeg- are sensitive by nature, and their ‘owners’ i.e. data subjects,
osztás vonatkozásában megcélzott uniós szintű joghar- are entitled for the protection of their privacy, so access to
monizációt. Ezzel összefüggésben meghatározó lehet az them could not be granted for third parties without restric -
egészségüggyel kapcsolatos jogalkotási hatáskörök tions. Responding to this challenge, more and more countries
megosztása és a szabályozás választott jogalapja. are realizing the need for a data strategy to frame the actions
Összességében a digitális átállással kapcsolatban ‒ to be taken to give way to secondary data-based innovations
beleértve az egészségügyi adathasználatot is ‒ az EHDS without sacrificing the fundamental human right to privacy.
hozzájárulhat az EU és a tagállamok közötti kompeten- “The European data strategy aims to make the EU a
ciamegosztás jelenlegi jogi paradigmájának újrafogalma- leader in a data-driven society” [2, no page number] by
zásához. Az állampolgárok szerepének erősítését ille- creating a single market for data to “benefit businesses, re -
tően az egészségügyi adathasznosítás uniós szinten searchers, and public administrations” [2, no page number].
megvalósítani célzott ökoszisztémája feltételezi, hogy az The strategy proposed “the establishment of domain-speci -
egyének tisztában legyenek egészségügyi adataik gaz- fic common European data spaces”, among which “the
dasági értékével, és az adataltruizmus révén ezen ada- European Health Data Space (EHDS) is the first proposal”
tokat a közjó érdekében is fel kívánják használni. Az [3, p. 2], adopted by the European Commission on 3 May
EHDS egyes rendelkezései, mint például az adathordoz- 2022 [3]. “EHDS will create a common space where natural
hatósághoz való jog vagy az adatmegosztási rendszer- persons can easily control their electronic health data. It will
ből való kimaradás lehetősége, határozottan az állampol- also make it possible for researchers, innovators and policy
gárok szerepének erősítését szolgálják. Ezek azonban makers to use this electronic health data in a trusted and
egyéni és lakossági szinten egyaránt csökkenthetik az secure way that preserves privacy” [3, p. 2]. The EHDS will
adathasznosítás egészségügyi ellátással összefüggő regulate the secondary use of health data and establish
előnyeit. Végső soron a polgárok valódi részvételéhez, cooperation among Member States on a specific cross-
elköteleződéséhez és az adataltruizmus megvalósulásá- border digital infrastructure, which enables data sharing.
hoz az érintett szabályozások kapcsolódó rendelkezése- According to the European Commission’s plans, it will estab-
inek összessége által meghatározott követelmények lish common rules of access to electronic health data for
együttesének teljesülése szükséges. secondary use based on a permit issued by a data access
body, while safeguarding the rights and interests of indivi -
Kulcsszavak: európai egészségügyi adattér rendelet, duals concerning their data [4]. The negotiations on the regu-
másodlagos adathasznosítás, jogi akadályok, polgárok sze- latory proposal between the co-legislators are ongoing, the
repének erősítése, adataltruizmus Council of the European Union (Council) adopted its mandate
for negotiation with the European Parliament on 6 December
6 IME – EGÉSZSÉGÜGYI VEZETŐK SZAKLAPJA – TUDOMÁNYOS FOLYÓIRAT XXIII. ÉVFOLYAM 2024/1. DIGITÁLIS KÜLÖNSZÁM
2023 [5], while the European Parliament voted on its amend- Although, the work of the TEHDAS consortia terminated
ments in first reading on 13 December 2023 [6]. Despite con- on 31 July 2023, a new Joint Action had already been initiated
cerns and doubts of stakeholders expressed during the nego- by the European Commission in the frame of the new health
tiations that the Commission’s original intention to complete programme, EU4Health [13], in order to ensure the continuity
the legislative process by the end of its current mandate on of work and to support the Commission with proposing
31 October 2024 and to launch the operation of EHDS in guidelines for the implementing regulations of the EHDS. The
2025 is not feasible because of the large number of issues new JA is expected to cover the development of guidelines
still to be addressed [7], recent developments offer reason for Health Data Access Bodies, data holders and users
for optimism. covering aspects such as data categories, compliance, col-
Joint Actions (JA) are a special type of EU funded policy laboration, altruism, obligations towards people, limitations
projects, where authorities of Member States and associated on data reuse, dataset descriptions, access, secure pro -
countries participating in the health programme of the EU cessing and research outcomes [14]. While TEHDAS aimed
(currently: EU4Health) are offered the opportunity to work to facilitate the development of the regulatory framework, with
together on issues, which can be best addressed at the a particular focus on envisioning the secondary use of health
European level, on a voluntary basis [8]. The EHDS legisla- data within the forthcoming EHDS, TEHDAS 2 is set to deve-
tive process has also been supported by a JA, the so-called lop practical tools to ensure that it goes operational.
“Joint Action towards the European Health Data Space”, or When analysing the main barriers to the implementation
TEHDAS for short, under the third Health Programme of the of the EHDS, TEHDAS has pointed out that most of them are
EU [9]. The number of countries involved, and the work related to legal aspects, including the lack of a common
accomplished within the framework of the projects indicate European interpretation of “secondary use of data”, and the
that the secondary use of health data is a priority topic for diverse landscape of national legislation and derogations
governments, and there is a willingness for cooperation to under the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [10].
make it reality. Further, the study on citizens’ perspectives revealed a public
Building on the work of previous, digital transformation interest in sharing health data, provided there are robust
related JAs, TEHDAS was a consortium of 22 EU Member privacy and security measures in place [12]. Focussing on
States and 3 associated countries, working for 30 months, the legal challenges of the secondary use of health data, this
from early 2021 with the aim to help Members States and the paper aims to analyse and discuss these findings in the
Commission in developing and promoting concepts for context of the current state of the EHDS legislation.
sharing of data so that “in the future European citizens, orga-
nisations, research and innovation, communities and compa- AIMS
nies will benefit from secure and seamless access to health
data regardless of where it is stored” [9, p. 23]. The primary This study had three objectives. Firstly, to examine the
research carried out by the project partners included a role of TEHDAS and the goals and expected outcomes of
thorough analysis of the available literature, the organisation TEHDAS 2 in the implementation of the EHDS in certain
of workshops to collect expert and stakeholder views and focus areas and provides an interpretation of those results.
semi-structured interviews with key informants. In the frame Secondly, to explore, through the evaluation of the practical
of the project, 12 Member States – including Hungary – were experiences of a Hungarian project partner (Semmelweis
visited (virtual or face-to-face) to gain insights into their University), the future possibilities of implementation and
perspectives and expectations regarding the EHDS. Through development, by analysing potential legal solutions and
active dialogue with key stakeholders, the discussions strategic directions at both national and EU levels. And finally,
acknowledged the benefits of the EHDS proposal, while it aims to support the dissemination of certain results of
also identified practical and legal hurdles that need to be TEHDAS project to stakeholders, both national and across
addressed to ensure its successful implementation [9]. borders, in order to support to the implementation of a
The main outputs of TEHDAS addressed a few important well-established European health data-sharing system.
themes, including the governance framework, specific natio- Although the Hungarian participation in the project
nal regulations and the state of national implementation of covered all the focus areas, special attention was given to
related European directives, data quality and semantic inter- the topic of citizens’ rights and data altruism practices beca-
operability, technical interoperability of infrastructures, the use the related activity was led by the Hungarian competent
security of data processing, and data altruism, i.e. the volun- authority, the National Directorate for Hospitals (OKFŐ). The
tary sharing of data for societal benefit [9,10,11,12,13]. As a analysis in the frame of this article aims to have a closer look
result, recommendations concerning Member States regula- at these areas, with the closely linked legal challenges iden-
tions were elaborated, a data quality framework was drafted, tified by the project. The paper aims to shed light on how the
a pan-European model for health data usage was introduced, forthcoming EHDS, with regard to the results of TEHDAS,
and a guideline was developed for encouraging and imple- may influence future national and EU legislative directions.
menting voluntary data sharing practices that adhere to data This includes supporting citizens in exercising their rights
protection laws [9,11,13]. related to health data and their readiness to voluntarily
IME – EGÉSZSÉGÜGYI VEZETŐK SZAKLAPJA – TUDOMÁNYOS FOLYÓIRAT XXIII. ÉVFOLYAM 2024/1. DIGITÁLIS KÜLÖNSZÁM 7
DIGITÁLIS EGÉSZSÉGÜGY ADATBIZTONSÁG SZAKCIKK
donate their data, as well as considering ways to overcome advanced ICT solutions (e.g. AI-based algorithms) and data
legislative barriers that hinder secondary use. sharing were accelerated during the end of the 2010s, also
fuelled by the COVID-19 pandemic. This latter can be rea -
METHODOLOGY sonably considered a booster of the use of so-called data-
driven digital solutions and its regulations, which brought up
The main method of the study is documentary analysis. issues regarding both primary and secondary use of digital
In particular, the publicly available outputs of the TEHDAS (electronic) health data.
project, and the relevant provisions of the draft regulation on One main legal challenge is determining what rules to
European Health Data Space have been reviewed, analysed follow in a certain case. As the explanatory memorandum of
and discussed. We have also conducted a literature search, the EHDS proposal also emphasises, this new, sector-speci-
and the findings of relevant research papers are also referred fic regulation shall be applied in accordance with the other
to, where appropriate. related EU laws. Thus, EHDS ‘builds upon’ related regula -
As the primary focus of our analysis is the project activi- tions such as the GDPR, the Data Governance Act [16], the
ties on the legal barriers of data-sharing and citizens’ in - Data Act [17], the Medical Device Regulation (MDR) [18] or
volvement, we systematically gathered publicly available the proposed AI Act [19]. Accordingly, the EHDS declared to
milestones and deliverables of the corresponding thematic set a more specific goal with a focus on specific personal,
activities, the so-called Work Packages (WP) of the TEHDAS sensitive health data (vs general rules for personal data in
project, namely WP 5 (data sharing) and WP 8 (citizen GDPR) and on data sharing and processing of a specific
perspectives). Each document related to WP5 and WP8 was domain (vs the horizontal approach of the Data Governance
meticulously reviewed. Act and the Data Act) and on electronic health record
For WP5, we concentrated on identifying and under - systems, i.e. EHRs (to find a regulatory gap considering the
standing the barriers to health data sharing and use, espe - scope and subject matter of the MDR and the proposed AI
cially those of legal nature. For WP8, our focus was on the Act) [3,20]. This brief summary may already show how a
findings related to better understanding of citizens’ attitudes highly complex legal system has evolved within the EU in the
towards sharing their health data and the role of data altruism last 5-6 years, in which national jurisdictions are also suppo-
in data sharing within the context of EHDS. sed to find their legislative role and position. Notably, despite
Concurrently, we conducted a thorough analysis of the the harmonisation enabled by EU-level regulations, this area
relevant provisions of the draft regulation on EHDS and a is a matter of complex competence distribution. Member
review of relevant academic literature, focusing on provisions States have the right not only to adopt derogations ensured
that relate directly to the challenges and themes identified in in EU regulations, but also to establish other rules according
WP5 and WP8. to their national legal and health systems (see assessment
The information from WP5 and WP8 results, along with of legal grounds below). The legal complexity evokes many
EHDS regulations and related literature, formed the basis of questions to be addressed concerning implementation, which
our analysis offering insights into the challenges of the should be solved partially by the legislator, but partially also
currently evolving framework of health data utilization and by other actors in the field, e.g. the EU and national institu -
sharing in the European Union, including implications for tions and organisations. EU-funded projects, like TEHDAS,
policy, practice, and future research. Our analysis also have also been launched to contribute to this effort. As
critically evaluates the approaches, results, and recommen- elaborated above, the aim of TEHDAS was to support the
dations of the TEHDAS project, focusing on the issues and European Commission in the establishment of the regulatory
challenges arising from the implementation of EHDS regula- framework, and as a further step forward, the main task of
tions. TEHDAS 2 is to make the EHDS operational by proposing
implementation guidelines and tools for Health Data Access
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Bodies, data holders and data users concerning many
issues, including legal, semantic, technical and organisational
The EHDS and, for that matter, any of the WPs in the aspects.
TEHDAS project cannot be evaluated as a standalone effort
to regulate the secondary use of data. In fact, there is a syste- Legislative barriers to the secondary use of health data
matic legislative strategy within the EU framed by the digital Barriers were identified – as mentioned above – by WP5
transition in general [2,15]. The first and most important of TEHDAS, when examining how to facilitate cross-border
EU regulation is arguably the GDPR in this realm, which sharing of data, among which seven were of legal nature
has been the primary building block in ensuring a legally (Table 1).
controlled environment for the re-use of data since 2016. Out of the barriers that were elaborated on, for the sake
However, the goal of GDPR is to use personal data in gene- of this discussion, the following topics are relevant: lack of
ral, hence its name. Therefore, even if the main requirements common definition of secondary use of data; already existing
are established, its legal instruments are not focused on and not harmonised national rules for secondary data usage,
health data. Furthermore, big data, data processing with including derogations allowed by the GDPR or other EU
8 IME – EGÉSZSÉGÜGYI VEZETŐK SZAKLAPJA – TUDOMÁNYOS FOLYÓIRAT XXIII. ÉVFOLYAM 2024/1. DIGITÁLIS KÜLÖNSZÁM
Table 1.
Final list of barriers as selected by participating TEHDAS countries (source: [11])
regulations; and national rules for health data, as a special may find an agreeably fine dichotomy in the pair of primary
data category under the GDPR. These are eminent examples and secondary use of data. Overall, from a legal point of view,
of the recent legal challenges. The recommendations of the the claims of the TEHDAS project on the need for a common
TEHDAS project can be summarised as the need for more interpretation of these terms in a legal context are valid.
harmonised rules throughout the EU, since, without that, the Nonetheless, this ‘doubled’ terminology can have its reason -
desired (cross-border) electronic health data sharing, which able legal function. Namely, it emphasises that under the
should not only boost the internal market, but also empower EDHS – and other horizontal regulations, such as the Data
the citizens over their data, will not be possible [11]. Governance Act – the focus is data usage per se and not
An initial issue to consider regarding the evaluation of the personal data as in the GDPR. Thus, when defining the pri-
EHDS is the discrepancy of the terminology. The GDPR [see mary and secondary use of data, the emphasis is put on the
Articles 5(1)(b) and 6(4)] does not mention the term ‘secon- purpose, while the data can or cannot be personal or de -
dary use of data’, and one can rightly wonder about the exact personalised by any means. EHDS clarifies this concerning
meaning of ‘re-use’ or ‘further processing’ within the EHDS health data, and the proposal defines the primary and secon-
framework other than use, i.e. processing data for purpose(s) dary use of health data [5]. Although these definitions do not
that are different from the original purpose of the data collec- seem to solve the evoked challenges regarding the overlap
tion (e.g. research). Nonetheless, EHDS builds upon the in meaning of terminologies of the GDPR and the EHDS; with
phrase of ‘secondary use of data’ in its context. To make a the detailed legal terms, the European jurisdiction will have
proper distinction and clarification of overlaps in terminology a means for reasoning in legal processes. This means, the
are relevant, since introducing a new legal term without a legal issue may be deemed to be addressed ‘only’ in a legal
different meaning is controversial or at least disturbing for any manner, since the interconnection between the EHDS and
jurists. Historically, the root of this issue might be that the the GDPR and the other mentioned regulations still needs to
development of data processing has been more technology- be found case by case. Thus, there is no clearcut solution,
driven during the last decade, and tech experts or experts neither for the legal community, nor for the public.
in fields other than law do not pay special attention to the As the TEHDAS WP5 identified, it is also a challenge to
requirements of adequately using legal terms. Moreover, one have common data-sharing within the EU since there are
IME – EGÉSZSÉGÜGYI VEZETŐK SZAKLAPJA – TUDOMÁNYOS FOLYÓIRAT XXIII. ÉVFOLYAM 2024/1. DIGITÁLIS KÜLÖNSZÁM 9
DIGITÁLIS EGÉSZSÉGÜGY ADATBIZTONSÁG SZAKCIKK
quite a few national rules, either based on derogations re - including data sharing [25], adjusted to their institutional and
ferred to the special categorisation established by the GDPR legal systems. In short, if there is a legal possibility and/or
[Article 9(4)] for personal health data or just because Member duty to have derogations and national-level rules on their own
States have already regulated many aspects of the primary rights, then there will be such laws, and these laws can help,
and secondary use of health data in general [11]. The main but can also hinder EU-level harmonisation efforts. Again, the
recommendation of the TEHDAS project is that ‘legal inter- conundrum arises, where the Member States should have
operability’ is needed, i.e., Member States should consider different regulations based on underlying differences in their
compatibility with the laws of other Member States before legal systems. From a broader perspective, the EHDS,
adopting or amending their national legislation. As the project concerning health care, might challenge the current legal
report emphasises, this concept requires the willingness to paradigm of competence distribution among the EU and the
adjust national laws to each other, especially in terms of Member States as part of the ongoing EU-level strategic
appropriate safeguards [21]. Indeed, ”establishing a common legislative efforts relating to digital transition, including data
mechanism to access electronic health data for secondary usage. An open question is what should be the solution to be
use”, as stipulated in Recital (37) [5], will be a significant supported by the EU and national actors. More harmonisation
challenge for EHDS. According to the EHDS, the Member is a curse or a blessing? Who will be the winner and the loser
States shall or may have different national regulations in rele- of these regulatory choices? As always, the devil lies in the
vant topics, such as the mentioned safeguards to enable details, and there is a long way to go to find the answers
appropriate protection for natural persons. This can be a concerning this new order, which could be identified as an
significant burden in terms of EU-wide harmonisation and the interconnected EU-wide legal ecosystem.
building of an interoperable system of data usage. Both are
important building blocks for data portability, service provision Citizens’ empowerment concerning control
and scientific research. Notably, the legislators also realised over their health data and data altruism
this issue regarding the EHDS, as they put effort into finding Another focus area of TEHDAS – examined in WP8 –
a balance between the two main objectives: empower natural was about the citizens’ perception of sharing health data for
persons concerning control over their health data and foster secondary use [12], and the so-called data altruism [13]. This
the internal market regarding, e.g. data-based research, aspect is important as it involves assessing the views of
innovation and policy-making concerning health care. To individuals (data subjects/natural persons) regarding the
accomplish these, the EHDS claims to initiate in its Recital secondary use of their health data. As it turned out, according
(67) [5] more robust and mandatory EU-level harmonised to studies and consultations made by the experts of WP8,
rules without crossing the legally enabled frames of regu - citizens have a strong relationship towards the use of their
latory competencies. This latter, i.e. finding the proper data, and “they feel that a piece of them, their identity and
boundary between the EU-level and national-level regulation, history, is being used” [12, p. 9]. However, for further consi-
can be one of the bottlenecks of the whole idea of the EHDS. deration, limitations of data altruism as a form of data sharing
The Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union have also been identified [12,13]. Nonetheless, the consul-
(TFEU), under Article 168 [22], regulates the division of com- tations showed that citizens want to take an active part in the
petencies related to health care in a way, where the EU, as a processes regulated by EHDS and wish to have a balanced
main rule, has a complementary regulatory responsibility to legal framework and a safe infrastructural environment to be
national rules and policies set by the Member States. able to be real actors and not only the object of others' data
Interestingly, however, the EHDS proposal, as the legal basis, processing activity (Figure 1).
invokes merely strengthening individuals’ right to data pro- Out of the number of recommendations the TEHDAS
tection (TFEU Article 16) and improving the internal market study provided, the one that people want to be well-informed
(TFEU Article 114), and Article 168 is only mentioned in the and gain autonomy and control over their health data seems
Explanatory Memorandum as to be respected [3]. This hardly to be straightforward. In line with this, according to the
can be deemed a coherent domain-specific choice, which consultations conducted in Task 8.2 of WP8 [13], citizens
could serve well the declared aims of the EHDS [23]. It is, “expressed a strong sense of altruism, which included a fair
however, considerable that the negotiations between the and equitable benefit for all, regardless of the choices of
Council and the European Parliament resulted in an em - others” [13, p. 29]. This implies that citizens are aware of the
phasis on national competencies (e.g. allowing patients to economic value of their data and want to use it for the
opt out of the new data-sharing system) [24], which can be common good, which can involve an implicit tension between
understood as an implied strengthening of the regulatory role the interests of the individuals’ rights and benefits at a
of Member States, in the spirit of Article 168. community level. It is a legitimate question to be addressed
Although the EU-level rules leave room for interpretation, whether individuals’ health-specific data, i.e. EHRs, are parts
it can be claimed with high certainty that the EU has a limited, of the ‘common good’ or whether they have full authority to
i.e. mainly internal market-focused, regulatory competence decide on using their data for any primary or secondary
concerning health care. This means that Member States can purposes [23].
and do have different rules for health care-related domains,
10 IME – EGÉSZSÉGÜGYI VEZETŐK SZAKLAPJA – TUDOMÁNYOS FOLYÓIRAT XXIII. ÉVFOLYAM 2024/1. DIGITÁLIS KÜLÖNSZÁM
Figure 1.
Recommendations for a citizen-powered framework for the European Health Data Space (source: [12])
As mentioned above, citizens’ empowerment is a crucial Nonetheless, there is no place for altruism, if the rules do not
declared aim of the EHDS. Thus, several provisions aim to ensure individuals' autonomy. Overall, a concert of require-
strengthen the rights and position of natural persons, e.g., ments should be fulfilled for meaningful citizens’ participation,
the right to portability [26]. Consent, established by the engagement, and practice of data altruism [29]. This evokes,
GDPR, is presumably the most potent means to achieve this again, the legal issues of the complex regulatory approach.
on the one hand, but it can also be a considerable burden on Consent and data altruism are part of the EHDS only via
the other [27]. For the sake of this discussion, the usually references to other regulations, i.e. it orders to apply the rules
cited argument of how data-protection laws are hindering of the GDPR and the Data Governance Act. Figure 2 illustra-
innovation [28] (including scientific research and substan - tes well the interplay of the three regulations: from a data
tiated policy-making) will be put aside. Nonetheless, the right subject’s consent (GDPR) throughout the data processing of
to opt-out, e.g. by restricting or objecting to access, can also a data altruism organisation (Data Governance Act) to the
reduce the potential health care-related benefits for the indi- data sharing between a data access body and a data appli-
vidual and the whole community. In short, if the individual cant (EHDS).
shares less data, they have less chance to enjoy the positive This is an intriguing lifecycle of health data that should
effects of more precise diagnosis and therapy based on more be transparent, secure and well-organised. Thus, proper
data. In turn, more opt-outs result in less effectiveness regulations needs to be established in order to make possible
re garding data-driven health care solutions for societies. achieving altruism-related goals. In this realm, natural
Figure 2.
The interplay between the DGA and the EHDS (source: [13])
IME – EGÉSZSÉGÜGYI VEZETŐK SZAKLAPJA – TUDOMÁNYOS FOLYÓIRAT XXIII. ÉVFOLYAM 2024/1. DIGITÁLIS KÜLÖNSZÁM 11
DIGITÁLIS EGÉSZSÉGÜGY ADATBIZTONSÁG SZAKCIKK
persons’ right to data portability, i.e. transferring their data and technological innovation in health care, but access to
from one data holder to another, can be an important means these personal data cannot be granted to third parties without
to support data altruism [26]. However, as the TEHDAS report safeguarding the patients right to privacy. The cooperation of
also pointed out, there can be issues in the implementation, countries at the European level can have an important added
e.g. conflict of values and interest, especially between for- value to the individual country level efforts to unlock the inno-
profit commercial interests and individual and societal bene- vation potential of health data, but the European legislation
fits [13]. The power imbalance between actors in the field, is a complex decision making process, especially in cases
indeed, should not be overlooked [30]. There is an ongoing involving highly sensitive issues, such as the fundamental
development of data-related services, where the private right to privacy. In any case, the EHDS is arguably a major
sector, especially the so-called Big Tech companies, are regulatory effort to harmonise the use of health data and the
al ready challenging the traditional risk-pooling-based public protection of the privacy of citizens, and the TEHDAS and
financing schemes. Thus, the questions at stake are whether TEHDAS 2 projects are valuable tools in supporting the
there is a balanced solution and whether the EHDS- legislative projects of EHDS, by the identification and analysis
conveyed legal framework will help to find or stifle this. of key issues, such as the legislative barriers to secondary
data use, the empowerment of citizens to have control over
Limitations their health data, and data altruism, as well as by the elabo-
All the legal issues discussed should be assessed in ration of recommendations on how to solve the identified
light of the fact the EHDS has not been adopted yet [31]. dilemmas and remove obstacles. However, the success of
Furthermore, many other rules are under preparation, e.g., these projects should not be assumed to be guaranteed; they
the so-called Rulebook of the Data Governance Act regarding merely offer opportunities. Ultimately, the practical value of
data altruism, which will be relevant for implementing the project outputs hinges on the contributions of those involved.
EHDS. Based on the ongoing legislative procedure between To make sense of the solutions offered, individual Member
the Council and the European Parliament, there may be rele- States should interpret the findings in the broader European
vant changes in the final text, which might address some of and national legal context and implement the solution
the dilemmas evaluated in this article. Overall, EU-funded adapted to the local circumstances.
projects such as TEHDAS can have multifold contributions
to the legislation. These projects provide a platform for the Funding
Member States to have intense and focused communication The authors have not received any funding.
and information exchange. Moreover, they provide a frame-
work to elaborate and develop practical details for the imple- Authors’ contributions
mentation and future interpretation of EHDS based on com- K.D.&R.K: paper concept and design and drafting of
mon and coordinated efforts of the Member States. Indirectly, the manuscript: P.G. Critical revision of the manuscript. All
this latter may significantly impact national legislation, which authors have read and agreed to the published version of the
might foster the adoption of more ‘compatibility-aware’ rules. manuscript.
Overall, the obligatory review and progress report explicitly
built into the EHDS (Article 70) opens up a further opportunity Competing interests
for EU projects, namely, even if the recommendations, The authors declare that they have no competing
already available lessons and results of the projects cannot interests.
be integrated into the current text of EHDS, those can
contribute, at least as starting points to the follow-up regula- Acknowledgements
tory processes. The authors would like to thank all project partners of
TEHDAS Joint Action and especially the leaders of the acti-
CONCLUSIONS vities in WP5 from the Swedish e-Health Agency, and in WP8
from the French Data Hub, Sciensano and the Hungarian
The availability of routinely generated health data for competent authority, OKFŐ for the common adventure in
secondary use has become a critical success factor of social completing the mission of TEHDAS.
REFERENCES
[1] Schlegel DR, Ficheur G: Secondary Use of Patient Data: [2] European Commission. European data strategy.
Review of the Literature Published in 2016; Yearb. Med. https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities-2019-
Inform.; 2017; 26(1), 68–71. https://doi.org/10.15265/IY- 2024/europe-fit-digital-age/european-data-strategy_en
2017-032 (Accessed 27 January 2024.)
12 IME – EGÉSZSÉGÜGYI VEZETŐK SZAKLAPJA – TUDOMÁNYOS FOLYÓIRAT XXIII. ÉVFOLYAM 2024/1. DIGITÁLIS KÜLÖNSZÁM
[3] European Commission. Proposal for a regulation of the advancing-data-sharing-to-improve-health-for-all-in-
European Parliament and of the Council on the Euro - europe/#preface (Accessed 30 January 2024.)
pean Health Data Space. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/reso- [12]TEHDAS. Qualitative study to assess citizens’ perception
urce.html?uri=cellar:dbfd8974-cb79-11ec-b6f4- of sharing health data for secondary use and recom -
01aa75ed71a1.0001.02/DOC_1&format=PDF mendations on how to engage citizens in the EHDS.
(Accessed 27 January 2024.) Deliverable 8.1 31 March 2023. https://tehdas.eu/app/
[4] European Commission. Questions and answers – EU uploads/2023/03/tehdas-study-to-assess-citizens-per-
Health: European Health Data Space (EHDS). https://ec. ception-of-sharing-health-data-for-secondary-use.pdf
europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/qanda_ (Accessed 27 Jan 2024.)
22_2712 (Accessed 27 January 2024.) [13]TEHDAS. Report on lessons learned to be applied and
[5] Council of the European Union. Proposal for a Regu - recommendations for data altruism practices in the imp-
lation on the European Health Data Space – Mandate for lementation of construction of national and European
negotiations with the European Parliament. Report No.: health data spaces (including broad consent) Deliverable
16048/1/23 REV 1. https://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/ 8.2. 29 September 23 https://tehdas.eu/results/tehdas-
document/ST-16048-2023-REV-1/en/pdf. (Accessed 27 proposals-for-promoting-data-altruism-in-the-ehds/
January 2024.) (Accessed 27 Jan 2024.)
[6] Amendments adopted by the European Parliament on [14]ANNEX to the COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECI-
13 December 2023 on the proposal for a regulation of SION on the financing of the Programme for the Union’s
the European Parliament and of the Council on the action in the field of health (‘EU4Health Programme’) and
European Health Data Space (COM(2022)0197–C9- the adoption of the work programme for 2023 https://
0167/2022–2022/0140(COD)) health.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2022-11/wp2023_
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/TA-9- annex_en.pdf. (Accessed 27 January 2024.)
2023-0462_EN.html. (Accessed 27 January 2024.) [15]European Commission, A Europe fit for the digital age,
[7] Stakeholders doubtful EU health data space will launch Empowering people with a new generation of technolo-
on schedule. Barbora Pištorová and Ondřej Plevák, gies, https://commission.europa.eu/strategy-and-policy/
EURACTIV.cz 22 of November 2022. https://www. priorities-2019-2024/europe-fit-digital-age_en.
euractiv.com/section/health-consumers/news/stakehol- (Accessed 28 January 2024.)
ders-doubtful-eu-health-data-space-will-launch-on-sche- [16]Regulation (EU) 2022/868 of the European Parliament
dule/. (Accessed 27 January 2024.) and of the Council of 30 May 2022 on European data
[8] Regulation (EU) 2021/522 of the European Parliament governance and amending Regulation (EU) 2018/1724
and of the Council of 24 March 2021 establishing a (Data Governance Act), https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
Programme for the Union’s action in the field of health content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32022R0868.
(‘EU4Health Programme’) for the period 2021-2027, and (Accessed 28 January 2024.)
repealing Regulation (EU) No 282/2014 (Text with EEA [17]Regulation (EU) 2023/2854 of the European Parliament
relevance) https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ and of the Council of 13 December 2023 on harmonised
TXT/?uri=uriserv%3AOJ.L_.2021.107.01.0001.01.ENG rules on fair access to and use of data and amending
(Assessed 30 January 2024.) Regulation (EU) 2017/2394 and Directive (EU) 2020/
[9] Advancing data sharing to improve health for all in Europe. 1828 (Data Act), https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/
Main findings of joint action Towards the European EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32023R2854&qid=170470956
Health Data Space 2021–2023. Markus Kalliola, Elina 8425. (Accessed 28 January 2024.)
Drakvik and Maria Nurmi (Editors). Sitra studies 236 [18]Regulation (EU) 2017/745 of the European Parliament
ISBN 978-952-347-347-8. and of the Council of 5 April 2017 on Medical Devices,
https://www.sitra.fi/en/publications/advancing-data-sha- Amending Directive 2001/83/EC, Regulation (EC) No
ring-to-improve-health-for-all-in-europe/ (Accessed 27 178/2002 and Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 and Re -
January 2024) pealing Council Directives 90/385/EEC and 93/42/EEC.,
[10]Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/
and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of ?uri=CELEX%3A32017R0745. (Accessed 28 January
natural persons with regard to the processing of personal 2024.)
data and on the free movement of such data, and repe- [19] European Commission, “Proposal for a Regulation of the
aling Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection European Parliament and of the Council Laying Down
Regulation, GDPR), https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/ Harmonised Rules on Artificial Intelligence (Artificial
2016/679/oj. (Assessed 28 January 2024.) Intelligence Act) and Amending Certain Union Legislative
[11] SITRA Publications. Advancing data sharing to improve Acts, COM/2021/206 final,” EUR-Lex, April 21, 2021,
health for all in Europe, Main findings of joint action https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/
Towards the European Health Data Space 2021–2023 ?uri=celex%3A52021PC0206. (Accessed 28 January
14 September, 2023. https://www.sitra.fi/en/publications/ 2024.)
IME – EGÉSZSÉGÜGYI VEZETŐK SZAKLAPJA – TUDOMÁNYOS FOLYÓIRAT XXIII. ÉVFOLYAM 2024/1. DIGITÁLIS KÜLÖNSZÁM 13
DIGITÁLIS EGÉSZSÉGÜGY ADATBIZTONSÁG SZAKCIKK
[20]Horgan D, Hajduch M, Vrana, M et al.: European Health [26]Li W, Quinn P: The European Health Data Space: An
Data Space – An Opportunity Now to Grasp the Future expanded right to data portability?; Comput. Law Secur.
of Data-Driven Healthcare.; Healthcare; 2022; 10(9), Rev.; 2024; 52, 105913.
1629. https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare10091629 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2023.105913
[27]Vukovic J, Ivankovic D, Habl C et al.: Enablers and bar-
[21]Study on the appropriate safeguards under Article 89(1) riers to the secondary use of health data in Europe:
GDPR for the processing of personal data for scientific general data protection regulation perspective; Arch
research, Final Report, EDPS/2019/02-08, https://edpb. Public Health; 2022; 80, 115.
europa.eu/system/files/2022-01/legalstudy_on_ https://doi.org/10.1186/s13690-022-00866-7
the_appropriate_safeguards_89.1.pdf. (Accessed 28 [28]Martin N, Matt C, Niebel C et al.: How Data Protection
January 2024.) Regulation Affects Startup Innovation; Inf Syst Front;
[22]Consolidated Version of the Treaty on the Functioning of 2019; 21, 1307–1324.
the European Union [2012] OJ C326/47 Art. 168 (TFEU) https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-019-09974-2
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/ [29]Saelaert M, Mathieu L, Van Hoof W et al.: Expanding
PDF/?uri=CELEX:12012E/TXT. (Accessed 28 January citizen engagement in the secondary use of health data:
2024.) An opportunity for national health data access bodies to
[23]Slokenberga S: Scientific Research Regime 2.0? How realise the intentions of the European Health Data
the proposed EHDS Regulation may change the GDPR Space; Arch Public Health; 2023; 81, 168.
Research Regime; Technology and Regulation; 2022; https://doi.org/10.1186/s13690-023-01182-4
135-147. https://doi.org/10.26116/techreg.2022.014 [30]Terzis P: Compromises and Asymmetries in the Euro-
[24]Council of the EU: European Health Data Space: Council pean Health Data Space; Eur. J. Health Law; 2022;
and Parliament strike deal, Press release, 15 March 30(3), 345–363.
2024. https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press- https://doi.org/10.1163/15718093-bja10099
releases/2024/03/15/european-health-data-space-coun- [31]Marelli L, Stevens M, Sharon T et al.: The European
cil-and-parliament-strike-provisional-deal/ (Accessed 16 health data space: Too big to succeed? ; Health Policy;
March 2024) 2023; 135, 104861, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healt-
[25]Bartlett O, Naumann A: A Reinterpreting the health in all hpol.2023.104861.
policies obligation in Article 168 TFEU: the first step
towards making enforcement a realistic prospect; Health
Econ Policy Law; 2021; 16,1, 8-22.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744133120000043
A SZERZŐK BEMUTATÁSA
Dr. iur. Davidovics Krisztina, LL.M tőjeként, majd 2020 óta ugyanitt az Egészségügyi Mene -
2004-ben végzett az Eötvös Loránd Tu - dzserképző Központ kötelékében dékáni tanácsadóként,
dományegyetem Állam- és Jog tudo má - illetve egészségügyi jogi és egészségpolitikai szakértőként
nyi Karán jogászként, majd 2008-ban dolgozik. Ennek keretében aktív tagja az adatvezérelt egész-
ugyanitt Szabályozási (kodifikátor) ségügyi, egészségbiztonsági, egészségpolitikai tárgykörök-
Szak jogász szakon LL.M. fokozatot kel összefüggő tudásközpontjainak és munkacsoportjainak.
szerzett. 2009-ben tett jogi szakvizsgát. Az Egészségügyi Menedzserképző Központon belül mester-
Kutatási és oktatási témáihoz illeszke- oktatóként alapító tagja az Egészségpolitika, Finanszírozás
dően, 2023-ban, Hollandiában egy to - és Rendszerfejlesztés Tanszéknek. Külső szakértője továbbá
vábbi LL.M. diplomát szerzett ’Law and Technology’ mester- a Magyar Egészségügyi Menedzsment Társaságnak. 2021
programon. 2005 és 2011 között az Igazságügyi Minisztérium óta szakértőként és koordinátorként közreműködik a ’Health
közjogi kodifikációs szakterületén a hazai szabályozási rend- Systems and Policy Monitor (HSPM Observatory)’ nemzet-
szer számos területén – különösen interdiszciplináris szabá- közi kutatóhálózatban a magyar kutatócsoport tagjaként.
lyozási feladatok esetén kutató, összehasonlító jogi munkák- Főbb szakterületei: adatvezérelt egészségügy, mesterséges
ban, kodifikációs bizottságokban való részvétellel – megha- intelligencia alapú egészségügyi megoldások jogi és etikai
tározó szakmai és vezetői tapasztalatokra tett szert. Ezt aspektusai, egészségpolitika, egészségügyi rendszerek irá-
követően 2012 és 2019 között a Semmelweis Egyetem nyítási és szabályozási kérdései.
Egészségügyi Közszolgálati Kara Dékáni Hivatalának veze-
14 IME – EGÉSZSÉGÜGYI VEZETŐK SZAKLAPJA – TUDOMÁNYOS FOLYÓIRAT XXIII. ÉVFOLYAM 2024/1. DIGITÁLIS KÜLÖNSZÁM
Dr. Kovács Réka 2001-ben a Buda - európai uniós és nemzetközi szakpolitikai és jogi feladataival
pesti Közgazdaságtudományi és Állam - foglalkozott szakértőként, osztályvezetőként, végül 2017 de -
igazgatási Egyetemen közgazdász, cemberétől főosztályvezetőként. 2020 szeptemberétől a
2003-ban a Pázmány Péter Katolikus Semmelweis Egyetem Egészségügyi Menedzserképző Köz-
Egyetemen jogász végzettséget szer- pont szenior egészségpolitikai és nemzetközi szakértőjeként
zett, jelenleg az ELTE Jogi Doktori nemzetközi finanszírozású projektek előkészítésében és vég-
Iskola PhD-hallgatója. Kutatási területe rehajtásában – elsősorban a digitális egészségügy és az
a személyek szabad mozgásának meg- egészségügyi humánerőforrás témakörökben –, illetve a
valósulását támogató uniós szabályozá- nemzetközi kapcsolatrendszer koordinálásában és fejleszté-
sok, különös tekintettel a határon átnyúló beteg- és szakem- sében vesz részt. A TEHDAS-projektben elsősorban az
bermobilitás kérdéseire. 2001-től az Egészségügyi Minisz - állam polgárok jogaival, illetve az adataltruizmussal kapcso-
térium, illetve jogutóda, az Emberi Erőforrások Minisztériuma latos feladatokhoz járult hozzá.
Prof. Dr. Gaál Péter 2011-től az IME ben pedig ugyanott sikerrel védte meg PhD-értekezését a
Szerkesztőbizottságának tagja, 2017-től magyarországi hálapénz jelenségének témakörében. A para-
pedig a Magyar Egészségügyi Me - szolvencia újszerű értelmezési keretét bemutató angol nyel-
nedzs ment Társaság elnöke, amely vű cikkével 2005-ben elnyerte az Európai Egészségügyi
2021-ben vette át az IME tudományos Menedzsment Társaság (EHMA) és a Karolinska Egyetem
folyóiratot, és a lapkiadás mellett szer- közös kutatási, publikációs díját. A Semmelweis Egyetem
vezője az IME konferenciáknak. 1993- Egészségügyi Menedzserképző Központ Egészségpolitika,
ban végzett a Semmelweis Orvostudo - Finanszírozás és Rendszerfejlesztés Tanszékének alapító-
mányi Egyetem Általános Orvostudo - vezetője, oktatója és kutatója. Szakterülete az egészségpo-
mányi Karán, 1995-ben szerzett Master of Science fokozatot litika, az egészségügyfinanszírozás, az egészségügyi rend-
egészségügyi menedzsmentből a Londoni Egyetemen, 2004- szerek teljesítményértékelése és az ellátásszervezés.
IME – EGÉSZSÉGÜGYI VEZETŐK SZAKLAPJA – TUDOMÁNYOS FOLYÓIRAT XXIII. ÉVFOLYAM 2024/1. DIGITÁLIS KÜLÖNSZÁM 15