Open Access Original
Article DOI: 10.7759/cureus.26215
Establishing a Clinical Brain-Computer Interface
Program for Children With Severe Neurological
Disabilities
Review began 11/25/2021
Review ended 06/22/2022
Published 06/22/2022 Zeanna Jadavji 1 , Ephrem Zewdie 1 , Dion Kelly 1 , Eli Kinney-Lang 1 , Ion Robu 2 , Adam Kirton 3
© Copyright 2022
Jadavji et al. This is an open access article 1. Clinical Neuroscience, University of Calgary, Calgary, CAN 2. Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Alberta
distributed under the terms of the Creative Children's Hospital, Calgary, CAN 3. Pediatrics, Clinical Neuroscience, University of Calgary, Calgary, CAN
Commons Attribution License CC-BY 4.0.,
which permits unrestricted use, distribution,
Corresponding author: Zeanna Jadavji, zajadavj@ucalgary.ca
and reproduction in any medium, provided
the original author and source are credited.
Abstract
Background: Children with severe motor impairment but intact cognition are deprived of fundamental
human rights. Quadriplegic cerebral palsy is the most common scenario where rehabilitation options remain
limited. Brain-computer interfaces (BCI) represent a potential solution, but pediatric populations have been
neglected. Direct engagement of children and families could provide meaningful opportunities while
informing program development. We describe a patient-centered, clinical, non-invasive pediatric BCI
program.
Methods: Eligible children were identified within a population-based, tertiary care children’s hospital.
Criteria included 1) age six to 18 years, 2) severe physical disability (non-ambulatory, minimal hand use), 3)
severely limited speech, and 4) evidence of grade 1 cognitive capacity. After initial screening for BCI
competency, participants attended regular sessions, attempting commercially available and customized
systems to play computer games, control devices, and attempt communication.
Results: We report the first 10 participants (median 11 years, range 6-16, 60% male). Over 334 hours of
participation, there were no serious adverse events. BCI training was well tolerated, with favorable feedback
from children and parents. All but one participant demonstrated the ability to perform BCI tasks. The
majority performed well, using motor imagery based tasks for games and entertainment. Difficulties were
most significant using P300, visual evoked potential based paradigms where maintenance of attention was
challenging. Children and families expressed interest in continuing and informing program development.
Conclusions: Patient-centered clinical BCI programs are feasible for children with severe disabilities.
Carefully selected participants can often learn quickly to perform meaningful tasks on readily available
systems. Patient and family motivation and engagement appear high.
Categories: Neurology, Pediatrics
Keywords: brain computer interface, cerebral palsy types, non-verbal communication, electroencephalography (eeg),
perinatal stroke, neuro-technology, clinical neuroscience
Introduction
Cerebral palsy (CP) causes lifelong disability for millions and is the most common pediatric motor disability
[1]. Children suffering from quadriplegic CP are often unable to achieve self-directed ambulation, manual
control, or communication [2,3]. Functional independence is strongly correlated to quality of life for
children with CP but is often virtually absent for those with quadriplegic CP [4,5].
Children with severe physical disabilities may have sparing of cognitive function and can be intellectually
typical. This tragic condition where a capable young person is trapped inside a body that cannot move or
communicate is analogous to locked-in syndrome [6]. Being fully aware and capable yet unable to interact
with the world deprives such individuals of inalienable, fundamental human rights. The United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) makes particular reference to the plight of
disabled children where quadriplegic CP provides a compelling example [7].
Brain-computer interface (BCI) technology can afford new avenues of independence and interaction for such
individuals. BCIs translate intention-related electrical activity recorded from the user’s brain into computer
commands to control external devices [8]. Advancements in non-invasive signal acquisition provide an
opportunity for BCI control through surface electroencephalography (EEG). A study of 12 adults with
locked-in syndrome suggested that patients could achieve high classification accuracies and simple yes/no
communication using non-invasive BCI [9]. We recently demonstrated that clinician awareness of BCI
technology is poor despite high estimates of clinical utility [10].
Pediatric populations have been neglected in BCI research despite many children with severe disability
How to cite this article
Jadavji Z, Zewdie E, Kelly D, et al. (June 22, 2022) Establishing a Clinical Brain-Computer Interface Program for Children With Severe Neurological
Disabilities. Cureus 14(6): e26215. DOI 10.7759/cureus.26215
suffering lifelong morbidity. However, we have shown that both typically developing school-aged children
and those with perinatal brain injury can successfully operate simple BCI systems [11,12]. A fundamental
gap exists between rapidly progressing technologies and the patients that could benefit. Clinical research
may provide opportunities for affected children to try emerging BCI systems while engaging families to
inform program development [13]. We describe early results from our attempt to develop a patient-centered,
non-invasive clinical BCI program for children with severe neurological disabilities.
Materials And Methods
Participants
Population-based screening of potentially eligible participants was performed in Southern Alberta, Canada
(population approx. 2.2 million). All health care professionals at the single referral tertiary care academic
children’s hospital caring for severely disabled children with relevant expertise (neurologists, physiatrists,
therapists, etc) were contacted. They were asked to identify children with the following specific criteria: (1)
age six to 18 years, (2) severe physical disability including non-ambulatory (GMFCS V) and minimal hand
use (MACS 5), (3) non-verbal or severely limited expressive speech, and (4) evidence from parents, teachers,
and/or therapists of grade 1 level cognitive capacity or better. A single invitation to refer was distributed in
October 2017, with open accrual encouraged between then and the time of this analysis (March 2020).
Referrals were reviewed by the study neurologist. Clinical information was obtained from the medical record
and discussion with clinicians familiar with the child and family. This information included confirmation of
the underlying disorder, CP classification, and information on hearing and vision status, cognitive potential,
comorbid conditions including epilepsy, use of different assistive technology and communication strategies,
and family dynamics. Neuroimaging was reviewed by the study neurologist to confirm diagnosis, absence of
additional neuropathology, and presence of fundamental neuroanatomy consistent with the reported level
of cognitive potential and potential for EEG-based BCI applications (i.e., substantial preservation of cerebral
cortex in at least one hemisphere).
A database of potential participants was maintained in estimated rank order of potential success based on
the above criteria and practical, patient-centered factors including, ability to attend regular appointments.
Intake proceeded down this list as the growing BCI program could accommodate. Parents or guardians
provided written informed consent. Methods were approved by the University of Calgary Research Ethics
Board REB15-2567.
Program structure
Participants were seen in clinic by the study neurologist to acquire relevant history, physical examination
and to explain the basic concept of BCI. To maintain realistic expectations, the program was described as
exploratory with no guaranteed success and assurance of no impact on ongoing standard clinical care.
This was followed by an introductory BCI session to gauge the child’s potential ability to control a simple
BCI. Initial sessions were completed using the EPOC+ where participants attempted simple tasks as outlined
below. If they demonstrated some ability to use the BCI with at least partial control, they were invited to join
the BCI program. If not, options were provided to 1) try the same or new systems on a subsequent day, 2) be
notified to return when new technologies became available.
After enrollment, regular BCI sessions were offered to the families. Sessions were scheduled for an hour and
adjusted according to the child’s engagement, interests, and ability. New activities were introduced
gradually, and their use was adjusted according to the same factors.
BCI systems
The technical and human resources of the BCI program are summarized in Table 1. The BCI program has
incorporated the use of three commercially available systems: 1) EMOTIV EPOC+ (EMOTIV, San Francisco,
CA, USA), 2) g.tec intendiX (g.tec, Schiedleberg, Austria), and 3) g.tec mindBEAGLE (g.tec). Headset design
and system details are included in Figures 1, 2 and Table 2, respectively.
2022 Jadavji et al. Cureus 14(6): e26215. DOI 10.7759/cureus.26215 2 of 13
Human Resources Credentials Roles
Patients and families Lived experience BCI end users attempting different tasks and providing feedback
MD, expert in perinatal brain injury Identifying eligible participants, maintaining recruitment database,
Pediatric Neurologist
Professor, clinician-scientist consulting on relevant clinical information
Lead Biomedical
PhD BME, expert in neuro-technology Design adaptation and implementation of BCI technology
Engineer
Augmented
Consulting on patient seating, screen positioning and alternate
communication Certified Occupational Therapist
assistive technology
specialist
BCI engineer MSc BME Technology design and optimization
BCI engineer PhD, now PDF Technology design and optimization
Clinical researcher BSc, now MD/PhD candidate Design and implementation of BCI program and patient engagement
Clinical researcher MBT, now PhD candidate Assisting in BCI sessions
MSc, Biomedical Equipment
Rehabilitation Engineer Technology design
Technologist
10-12 neurologists, physiatrists,
Referring specialists Identifying eligible participants
therapists
Summer students N=5-6 per year Condensed research projects
Study coordinator Administrative responsibilities
TABLE 1: BCI Program Team, Structure and Resources.
Personnel and associated roles of team members involved in the brain-computer interface (BCI) program.
FIGURE 1: BCI systems.
(A) The EMOTIV EPOC+ headset (B) The EMOTIV EPOC+ EEG montage. Red circles indicate EEG recording
channels. Yellow and blue circles represent ground and reference electrodes, respectively.
2022 Jadavji et al. Cureus 14(6): e26215. DOI 10.7759/cureus.26215 3 of 13
FIGURE 2: BCI systems continued.
(A) The g.tec intendix and mindBEAGLE headset. The EEG headset is sizeable to individual participants (B) The
g.tec intendix montage (C) The g.tec mindBEAGLE montage. Red circles indicate EEG recording channels.
Yellow and blue circles represent ground and reference electrodes, respectively.
Conductive International Sampling Associated
BCI System Recording Electrode Configuration Filtering
solution EEG System Rate Paradigms
Bandpass
EMOTIV 14 channel AF3, AF4, F3, F4, F7, F8, FC5,
Saline 10-20 128Hz filter: 0.16- MI
EPOC+ FC6, P7, P8, T7, T8, O1, O2
45Hz
Notch filter:
g.tec intendiX Gel 10-10 8 channel Fz, Cz, P3, Pz, P4, P07, Oz,P08 256Hz VEP
60 Hz
16 channel FC3,FCz,FC4,C5,C3,
g.tec Notch filter: MI, AEP,
Gel 10-10 C1,Cz,C2,C4,C6,CP3, CP1,CPz,CP2,CP4 and 256Hz
mindBEAGLE 60 Hz VTP
Pz
Technological Resources Estimated Cost Roles
EMOTIV EPOC+ $699.00 USD Wireless EEG headset and software
g.tec intendiX $15-20K USD BCI suite for P300 spelling
g.tec mindBEAGLE $30-35K USD BCI suite for assessment of consciousness and communication
Sphero SPRK+ $129 USD Used in maze and painting activities
Remote controlled (RC) toy
$20 USD Controlled by BCI
car
Arduino (board + starter kit) $135 USD Interfacing with RC toy car
TABLE 2: BCI Systems.
Description of each system used in the pediatric brain-computer interface (BCI) program with specifics on EEG data collection and sampling as well as
paradigms used. Cost estimates of technical resources included.
MI: Motor Imagery, VEP: Visual Evoked Potential, AEP: Auditory Evoked Potential, VTP: Vibrotactile Evoked Potential
Different BCI paradigms were used for device control. Motor imagery was performed by imagining an
intended movement without actual movement or muscle activation. Motor imagery causes EEG amplitude
changes over the sensorimotor cortex that the computer recognizes and translates into a keyboard output
for device control [14]. External stimulation paradigms were based on visual, auditory, and vibrotactile
evoked potentials measured at 300ms latency (P300) [15]. These three modes make use of the well-defined
oddball paradigm where participants were asked to attend to specific, target stimuli while ignoring non-
target stimuli [16-18].
Activities and training
2022 Jadavji et al. Cureus 14(6): e26215. DOI 10.7759/cureus.26215 4 of 13
Motor imagery was used with the EPOC+ to control computer-based games, drive a toy car, control a Sphero
SPRK+ robot (Sphero, Boulder, CO, USA) and select items on an iPad. Training across all EPOC+ tasks
included brief 8-second windows of training where participants practiced being relaxed and then imagined
“pushing” the item they were attempting to control. During “pushing”, whenever the power of the EEG
frequency spectrum passed a preset threshold, a keyboard output was produced. If able, patients could raise
their eyebrows to generate an electromyography (EMG) signal that was mapped to an additional keyboard
output. During the mindBEAGLE motor imagery training participants imagined the movement of their left or
right hand in random order. Children were asked to imagine movement of their right hand to signal a “yes”
response and their left hand to indicate “no”.
Controlling a floating cube
An animated cube was presented on the computer screen; using the EPOC+ participants were trained to use
motor imagery to push the floating cube away from them or to remain relaxed in order to keep it stationary.
Controlling a remote-controlled car
Using the EMOTIV software, the “push” training was mapped to a keyboard input. A custom made script
sent the keyboard command via serial port to a custom interface which was connected to the computer via
USB cable. A commercially available toy car was modified to be controlled by this interface. Participants
attempted driving the car forward and stopping it at a target location on command as previously described
[11]. EMG signals from eyebrow raising could be used to reverse the car.
Sphero SPRK+ control
A Sphero SPRK+ robot was controlled via keyboard input from the EMOTIV software. The “push” command
was used to move the spherical robot in a forward direction using Bluetooth connectivity (Figure 3A).
Rotation of the robot to change direction was controlled by either a manual keypress by the experimenter or
EMG recorded from eyebrow raising. The second activity allowed participants to drive the robot over a
canvas covered in paint creating unique artwork (see Figure 3D, 3E).
FIGURE 3: BCI Activities and Clinical Applications.
(A) Sphero SPRK+ robot used to create brain-computer interface (BCI) paintings (B) A young man proficient in
BCI gaming tries a new popular commercial game modified for EMOTIV control. (C) A young boy and his sister
race remote control cars using the EMOTIV. (D) (E) Sphero painting activity. Participants wearing the EMOTIV
EPOC+ headset are seated facing a canvas. The Sphero SPRK+ is placed within a bordered canvas with blobs of
paint and colours chosen by the participant who then drives the Sphero SPRK+ to create the painting.
iPad control
Participants attempted navigating through icons on an iPad using the EPOC+ to open a smart home
application to turn on a desk lap or fan by activating a smart switch. Commands were recorded, mapped and
used to control a custom interface in a similar manner as in the car task. A commercially available iPad
keyboard was modified to be controlled by this interface.
Computer games
A suite of BCI-driven computer games was developed including premade and available online as well as
custom-designed. All games were played using a single command generated by the user thinking of pushing
the character or item on the screen. Push commands were mapped to a keyboard input sent directly to the
game. Examples of games include using the push command to have the onscreen character jump over
2022 Jadavji et al. Cureus 14(6): e26215. DOI 10.7759/cureus.26215 5 of 13
obstacles and target shooting.
Spelling
The intendiX system included a communication board on a computer screen (Figure 4A) and participants
used a visual P300 paradigm to select letters. A classifier was generated after a 5-minute training session.
During spelling, participants were asked to attempt to select letters by counting the number of times their
target letter flashed on the screen.
FIGURE 4: BCI Activities and Clinical Applications Continued
(A) An adolescent attempts to use the g.tec intendiX P300-based speller. (B) Two children with acute locked-in
syndrome secondary to brainstem stroke and (C) acute necrotizing encephalopathy were able to demonstrate
their full consciousness and engage in multiple brain-computer interface (BCI) activities.
Yes/No communication
The mindBEAGLE system used vibro-tactile and auditory evoked potentials and motor imagery paradigms
for “yes”/”no” communication and to assess consciousness.
Results
Participants
At the time of this report, the referral process has identified >30 potential candidates of which 10 have been
recruited. All families approached accepted the invitation to join. Participant characteristics and BCI
experience are summarized in Table 3. Two adults with locked-in syndrome secondary to brainstem stroke
also participated in a modified program but are not described here.
2022 Jadavji et al. Cureus 14(6): e26215. DOI 10.7759/cureus.26215 6 of 13
Age Verbal BCI Use Time Paradigms
Parti. Sex Pathology Motor syndrome Epilepsy
(yrs) Comm (hrs) Attempted
P1 M 11 Extreme prematurity Dyskinetic QCP Y N 122 MI, VEP
Lesch-Nyhan
P2 M 12 Dyskinetic QCP N N 40 MI, VEP
Disease
P3 F 14 Bilateral stroke Mixed QCP, Non-verbal N Y 73 MI, VEP, VTP
MI, VEP, VTP,
P4 F 16 Brainstem stroke Locked-in Syndrome N Y 7
AEP
Acute Brainstem
P5 M 6 ANEC N N 5 MI
Dysfunction
P6 M 11 Kernicterus Dyskinetic QCP N N 55 MI, VEP
Bilateral
P7 M 8 QCP N Y 18 MI
Schizencephaly
Acute Brainstem
P8 F 13 Brainstem Injury N N 10 MI, VEP
Dysfunction
P9 M 8 NAIS, GBS Dyskinetic QCP N N 4 MI, VEP
P10 F 7 Bilateral stroke Mixed QCP N Y 1 MI
TABLE 3: Participant Demographics.
Information on participant pathology and outcomes along with time spent using brain-computer interface (BCI) and paradigms attempted.
ANEC: Acute Necrotizing Encephalopathy of Childhood, NAIS: Neonatal Arterial Ischemic Stroke, GBS: Guillain-Barré Syndrome, QCP: Quadriplegic
Cerebral Palsy, MI: Motor Imagery, VEP: Visual Evoked Potential, AEP: Auditory Evoked Potential, VTP: Vibrotactile Evoked Potential
A total of 334 hours of BCI sessions were well tolerated with no serious adverse events. Sessions lasted
approximately 60 minutes though some continued for up to two hours. Parents often reported child fatigue
after long sessions. Children were constantly consulted on their preferred activities and desired session
length. Most were able to indicate “yes” or “no” responses with parents’ assistance. With the exception of
P4, no participants have withdrawn from the program and all expressed interest in continued involvement.
Details of each participant’s experience are summarized as follows.
Participant 1
P1 is an 11-year-old male with dystonic quadriplegic CP secondary to extreme prematurity with typical
intellectual functioning. He has been enrolled in the BCI program since its inception (three years), attending
regular weekly sessions. Challenges have included his wheelchair headrest needing to be removed to prevent
interference with the EPOC+ headset. He has been successful in using the motor imagery paradigm to
perform all EPOC+ activities. While he also demonstrated the ability to use the intendiX system to spell
multiple words, it was difficult to maintain his engagement during this task. BCI has provided him his first
opportunity to engage in independent play with his brothers. During his recovery after major surgeries, he
has used BCI as an inpatient. We have begun successful home-based BCI use by lending equipment to the
family and empowering them to set up and control the system so he can play his favorite BCI games at home.
Participant 2
P2 is a 12-year-old male with severe dystonic quadriplegic CP secondary to Lesch-Nyhan disease, a rare
genetic inborn error of metabolism. He has mild developmental delays but is intellectually capable. He has
been enrolled in the BCI program for three years successfully demonstrating voluntary control using the
EPOC+ for the following tasks; 1) floating cube, 2) toy car racing, 3) Sphero maze and painting and 4)
computer games. He was unsuccessful on several attempts using the intendiX speller where he was visibly
distracted during each attempt to create a classifier, was unable to maintain gaze on the speller board, and
expressed discomfort using the EEG caps (Figure 2A), preferring the EPOC+ headset (Figure 1A). The
participant had a love of remote controlled cars and the BCI program gave him his first opportunity to race
independently. He has also raced cars against his sisters and parents, who were also using the EPOC+ (Figure
3C). He and his family are interested in adding new commands for multiple degrees of control for the car.
EMG activity from eyebrow raise has not provided a reliable additional command.
2022 Jadavji et al. Cureus 14(6): e26215. DOI 10.7759/cureus.26215 7 of 13
Participant 3
P3 is a 14-year-old female who suffered bilateral arterial strokes in utero resulting in predominantly spastic
quadriplegic CP. She is an intelligent young girl who reads above grade level but has no verbal
communication or functional hand use. She is able to signal “yes” by sticking out her tongue. She has been
actively engaged in the program for two years attending weekly BCI training sessions. She has been
successful using all EPOC+ based tasks including using an iPad to turn on a fan. She had difficulties using the
indendiX spelling system and was visibly distracted often diverting her gaze from the computer screen
during training. She has developed a passion for art and was previously unable to paint independently, she
has now created dozens of unique pieces of BCI artwork (Figure 3E). She has donated some of her work and
sold several pieces. One goal is to create more degrees of control for her Sphero painting as she has been
unable to use EMG to control directional movement of the robot.
Participant 4
P4 is a 16-year-old female who sustained severe brainstem and thalamic injuries due to hemorrhagic stroke
following surgery for a brainstem tumor. There was clinical concern that she had been locked in for
approximately three years at the time of her first BCI appointment. Her family reached out to our program
after having years of unsuccessful attempts at utilizing eye gaze systems for communication. The participant
and her family attended three sessions to explore BCI as a possible tool for communication. She was unable
to demonstrate reliable and consistent voluntary control during both the floating cube and toy car racing
tasks. Focus was therefore transferred to g.tec mindBEAGLE tasks but she did not demonstrate success
across any of the paradigms. Although her previous EEG studies post-injury had been nearly normal, we
repeated a clinical study and discovered that she evolved an epileptic encephalopathy with almost
continuous generalized spike and wave discharges sometime in the preceding three years. With the help of
her treating epileptologists, aggressive treatment was attempted over many months but was unsuccessful.
After discussion with the family, her participation in the BCI program was discontinued.
Participant 5
P5 is a previously healthy six-year-old boy who developed acute necrotizing encephalopathy after
contracting influenza. He had acute, bilateral brainstem lesions and a clinical locked-in syndrome. He was
unable to move his limbs or communicate verbally and had limited preservation of some eye movements. His
parents and intensive care doctors expressed concern about his cognitive awareness and capability. Our BCI
team was consulted via the neurocritical care service. The EPOC+ system was brought to the patient’s
bedside in keeping with infection control and other hospital best practices. He directed his gaze toward the
computer screen and held it there throughout training and could consistently push the cube and keep it
stationary on command. Subsequently, he demonstrated success playing an animated computer game after
brief training. His family was thrilled to witness his ability to voluntarily control these activities while
confirmation of his consciousness informed his care planning in the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU).
During later sessions he demonstrated successful control in driving the toy car to designated targets. Even
after regaining arm movement and verbal communication he continued using BCI as a recreational activity
during his hospital admission. He created a painting using the BCI and Sphero which still hangs in his home
today. He has since made a full recovery.
Participant 6
P6 is an 11-year-old male with dyskinetic quadriplegic CP secondary to kernicterus who has been enrolled in
the BCI program for 18 months. He has typical intellectual function, good vision and hearing but no
functional hand use. While he has no verbal communication, he is able to raise and lower his gaze to signal
“yes” and “no” responses, respectively. He and his family have been attending weekly BCI sessions since his
enrollment 18 months ago and are interested in continuing involvement. He has extremely limited control
of his neck and during EPOC+ activities he required a parent to hold his head in position. He has been
successful in using each of the BCI paradigms attempted (see Table 2) and has expressed a preference for
painting with the Sphero. He was also able to accurately select five out of five target letters from the spelling
board and expressed that he would be willing to train further using the intendiX speller.
Participant 7
P7 is an eight-year-old male with quadriplegic CP secondary to bilateral schizencephaly. This young boy
appears to be intellectually typical with good vision but no functional use of his extremities. He is non-
verbal but capable of expressing “yes” and “no” through changes in facial expression, which his parents
assist in interpreting. This participant has attended weekly BCI sessions for six months and has
demonstrated good voluntary control during all EPOC+ tasks. He has a preference for Sphero painting as well
as a new custom-designed target shooting computer game. We chose not to pursue the intendiX task with
this participant because he found the headset uncomfortable. He is excited to bring other family members
along to his BCI sessions to showcase his ability. During his participation in the program he has had his first
opportunity to create tangible and independent artwork and was excited to play video games that resembled
the ones his dad plays at home.
2022 Jadavji et al. Cureus 14(6): e26215. DOI 10.7759/cureus.26215 8 of 13
Participant 8
P8 is a previously healthy 13-year-old female who had an acute brainstem stroke secondary to traumatic
vertebral artery dissection. She was intubated in a locked-in state days later with no ability to communicate.
Her intensive care team was concerned she was not conscious. She was referred to the BCI program by her
neurocritical care neurologist. The EPOC+ system was brought to the bedside in accordance with infection
control policies (Figure 4B). After a 10-minute training period, she could push the cube and hold it in
position on command. She successfully attempted an EPOC+-based computer game, making her character
jump over obstacles. This initial success was encouraging to her family and convinced the hospital staff of
her intact consciousness. Training continued for several weeks where she was successful at Sphero painting
but unable to use the intendiX communication board. While intubated in the PICU, headset placement was
often difficult, requiring pillows or others to physically support her head. We attempted to introduce a
second “left” command using left hand squeeze imagery-related SMR pattern during which she physically
squeezed her hand for the first time. Over months she regained motor and communication skills and no
longer required BCI systems.
Participant 9
P9 is an eight-year-old male with dyskinetic quadriplegic CP secondary to bilateral, deep neonatal arterial
ischemic strokes secondary to group B streptococcal meningitis. He has very little functional hand use and
no verbal communication but is able to sign “yes” and “no” and is probably intellectually normal. He has
completed three introductory BCI sessions and demonstrated success in many EPOC+ tasks including
floating cube, toy car racing, single command computer games, Sphero maze and painting. During training,
his wheelchair headrest is removed and he can maintain his head position independently. He was
unsuccessful using the intendiX and became visibly distracted after three minutes of training. He was able to
select letters in close proximity to the target letter. His mother suggested that this may be difficult because
he uses an eye gaze system which requires less sustained attention. His excessive movements created
seating challenges and he was moved to a bean bag style chair which allowed him to relax and continue
training.
Participant 10
P10 is a seven-year-old female with quadriplegic CP secondary to fetal strokes occupying most of the middle
cerebral artery territories bilaterally. She is a bright and social young girl who has no functional use of her
extremities. She is non-verbal but can express some yes and no responses through changes in facial
expression which her parents help to interpret. She has completed her initial screening session and has
demonstrated voluntary control of the floating cube, toy car and EPOC+ based computer games. Despite
living outside of the city, this participant and her family have expressed interest in attending monthly
sessions and we are also pursuing remote or home-based options.
Based on the above experience, including input from users and their families, we have developed a
personalized, goal-oriented, “fast-fail” approach to drive the next phase of program development (Figure 5).
2022 Jadavji et al. Cureus 14(6): e26215. DOI 10.7759/cureus.26215 9 of 13
FIGURE 5: Fast-fail, personalized goal-setting.
A new program model designed to integrate parent, teacher and participant objectives for brain-computer interface
(BCI) control. Attainable goals for BCI applications will be set with the family, BCI team and health care
professionals familiar with assistive technology (ACETS: Augmentative Communication and Educational
Technology). As the child continues to attend regular BCI training sessions, rapid prototyping will take place to
develop new applications. These will ultimately be brought back to the child for pilot testing and further developed.
Eventual transition of applications into the home, school and for commercialization are important considerations
moving forward.
Discussion
We report the early establishment of a clinical BCI program for children with severe disability. Systematic
screening identified many potential candidates. Engagement from patients and their families was high with
100% enrolment, keen participation, and ongoing commitment. Nearly all participants succeeded in
acquiring BCI control and many developed diverse skills and realized personal accomplishments that were
not previously possible. Factors related to technologies, goals, and individual differences of each participant
and family were identified to facilitate program growth.
We believe the high level of engagement and commitment from our young participants and their families
attests to the potential value of this clinical BCI program. Long-term engagement occurred for all but one,
suggesting some degree of benefit gained through participation. This is encouraging considering our candor
with participants and their families avoiding any unrealistic expectations. Canadian specialists who care for
persons with severe disability have confirmed a high level of potential clinical utility [10]. We recruited a
critical mass of well-qualified participants from a moderately sized, single referral center. It seems clear that
there is an unmet need for advanced assistive technology in severely disabled children and, consistent with
international policy on the rights of persons with disability, we would advocate for the further growth of
pediatric BCI programs.
2022 Jadavji et al. Cureus 14(6): e26215. DOI 10.7759/cureus.26215 10 of 13
Meaningful engagement requires motivation, which was a challenge for multiple users. Adult studies have
described the impact of motivation on BCI performance and this may be exacerbated in young children [19].
Several participants reported high interest and success using motor imagery for play but then lacked
engagement during the P300 spelling task. This could be related to the engaging feedback and short training
of motor imagery activities in contrast to spelling tasks. Effective feedback is especially necessary when
attempting BCI tasks for the first time [20]. Performance using the P300 speller relies on the quality of the
classifier produced; a poorly trained classifier hinders performance and may reinforce poor strategy [20].
Studies in adults suggest feedback should be supportive and dynamic, providing information on how to
improve [21]. This could be helpful for young children during tasks that may not have intuitive outcomes.
For example, it may be clearer to the child to focus on “pushing” to move a toy as opposed to counting
flashing letters to spell. Children need to participate in frequent practice to improve BCI skills [20].
Difficulties adopting assistive technology for children with severe disability are related to limited
adaptability of software for different needs [22]. Adaptable and engaging tasks are likely to positively impact
BCI performance for these children.
One solution to enhance motivation and attention in young BCI users may be gaming. The range of simple
BCI games in our program, while popular, were quite limited and participants were often quick to reach
competency. Gamification of BCI tasks has the potential to improve engagement and motivation and serve
as a tool to train specific tasks [23,24]. Research in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
often utilizes game-based training to maintain attention [25]. That games should differ in content and
theme and have varying levels of difficulty needs to be applied to BCI [20]. Participants indicated keen
interest in the commercially available games their friends and siblings play. Connecting with leading game
developers to advance BCI-specific applications can facilitate skill training, higher levels of recreational
therapy, and social networking (e.g. online gaming networks). Parents also expressed interest in educational
applications and advancing engaging tasks for spelling, reading, math and other subjects is an intended aim
of our program.
Important challenges were identified. Participant 4 was unable to use the BCI likely due to underlying
pathological EEG activity. Clinical data including baseline EEG may help inform participant selection.
Neuroimaging was used to help estimate cognitive potential in the face of severe physical disability. Most
had relative sparing of the cortex, the source of EEG signal and key to intellectual functioning. While
mechanisms of BCI control in CP have not been well studied, the health of the cortex is almost surely related
to BCI performance. However, the cortex may not need to be entirely intact including several participants
here and previous studies of children with perinatal stroke can demonstrate good BCI performance [12]. This
selection factor may have been overlooked in previous studies of BCI users with more generic “cerebral
palsy” and our possibly high success rate may in part reflect this anatomical screening approach.
Another important consideration is EEG headset design for such complex pediatric populations. Children
with severe physical disability often have limited head and neck control and/or severe dyskinetic
movements. Accordingly, headsets like the EPOC+ often required an assistant to physically support the
participant to maintain electrode placement. This can result in discomfort for the child and assistant while
potentially introducing unwanted EEG noise. Clinical EEG caps may overcome this but created additional
discomfort in some cases. Innovative approaches to EEG sampling and supportive measures to improve
physical comfort, like the beanbag chair example, are required.
We would also highlight the importance of a multidisciplinary team. This starts and ends with affected
children and their families whose active engagement is essential to program success. Adoption of assistive
technology is reliant on many factors, however a common reason for abandonment is incongruence with the
users’ needs [26]. We must also improve awareness and input from health care professionals who are best
able to identify eligible children and carry deep understanding of their needs and challenges. BCI
development is proceeding rapidly but focusing only on technological advancement without affording equal
attention to the needs of children and families will limit progress [19,20].
Conclusions
Patient-centered, clinical BCI programs appear to be feasible for children with severe neurological disability.
We have demonstrated that such children are not only able to use simple BCI systems for play and
communication, but they and their families are potentially interested in long-term involvement as members
of a clinical BCI program. Children with severe quadriplegic CP and no verbal communication, who had
never had the opportunity to participate in activities independently, were able to create artwork, drive
remote-controlled cars, play simple single-control computer games and slowly select letters from a
communication board. While these were personally and clinically meaningful accomplishments and a step
forward in the field of accessible technologies for severely disabled children, there are still many gaps to fill.
As demonstrated, there is a significant lack of BCI research in children with disabilities and currently
available systems are not adapted to their unique physiology, needs, or interests. The commercially available
systems used in our program had limited flexibility for pediatric use including rigid headset structure
and electrode layout. The applications available were also limited and tasks were not always presented in an
engaging way for our young participants. Despite these challenges, we have shown that buy-in from
2022 Jadavji et al. Cureus 14(6): e26215. DOI 10.7759/cureus.26215 11 of 13
participants and their families is high. This motivation to participate in our clinical program highlights the
lack of options, steadfast advocacy of parents for their children, and marked opportunities for these
families. At the same time it represents a powerful, untapped resource by which the advancement of BCI
neurotechnologies can be enhanced to potentially impact independence and quality of life for children
whose current options are extremely limited.
BCI technological progress is rapid and inevitable; matching this progress from the clinical side and the
perspective of disabled children and their families is essential for the full potential of pediatric BCI to be
realized. We hope our findings will encourage such collaborations, support the development of BCI programs
focused on children elsewhere, and one day expand to include more impactful applications such as
wheelchair control, fluent communication, increased access to entertainment, and improvement in overall
independence for these children.
Additional Information
Disclosures
Human subjects: Consent was obtained or waived by all participants in this study. Conjoint Health
Research Ethics Board of the University of Calgary issued approval REB15-2567. RE: Mind control for
cerebral palsy: Brain-computer interface development in children with severe motor disabilities The above-
named research, including: BCI Research Consent Form, 1 clean, January 5, 2016 BCI Research Consent
Form, 1, January 4, 2016 BCI Research Assent, 1, November 5, 2015 BCI Study Protocol, 1, November 15,
2015 has been granted ethical approval by the Conjoint Health Research Ethics Board of the University of
Calgary. The Board conforms to the Tri-Council Guidelines, ICH Guidelines and amendments to regulations
of the Food and Drugs Act re clinical trials, including membership and requirements for a quorum. You and
your co-investigators are not members of the CHREB and did not participate in review or voting on this
study. This study has been reviewed and approved by the full Conjoint Health Research Ethics Board of the
University of Calgary on December 17, 2015. Please note that this approval is subject to the following
conditions: A renewal must be submitted by January 7, 2017, containing the following information: The
number of participants recruited; A description of any protocol modification; Any unusual and/or severe
complications, adverse events or unanticipated problems involving risks to participants or others,
withdrawal of participants from the research, or complaints about the research; A summary of any recent
literature, finding, or other relevant information, especially information about risks associated with the
research; A copy of the current informed consent form; The expected date of termination of this project. A
Final Report must be submitted at the termination of the project. Please accept the Board's best wishes for
success in your research. Sincerely, Stacey A. Page, PhD, Chair, CHREB. Animal subjects: All authors have
confirmed that this study did not involve animal subjects or tissue. Conflicts of interest: In compliance
with the ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: Payment/services info: This
study was supported by the Heart and Stroke Foundation Seed Grant under grant number 10012689 and the
Alberta Children’s Hospital Department of Pediatrics innovation award. Financial relationships: All
authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present or within the previous three years
with any organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors
have declared that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the
submitted work.
References
1. Stavsky M, Mor O, Mastrolia SA, Greenbaum S, Than NG, Erez O: Cerebral palsy-trends in epidemiology and
recent development in prenatal mechanisms of disease, treatment, and prevention. Front Pediatr. 2017,
5:21. 10.3389/fped.2017.00021
2. Jan MM: Cerebral palsy: comprehensive review and update. Ann Saudi Med. 2006, 26:123-32. 10.5144/0256-
4947.2006.123
3. Patel DR, Neelakantan M, Pandher K, Merrick J: Cerebral palsy in children: a clinical overview. Transl
Pediatr. 2020, 9:S125-35. 10.21037/tp.2020.01.01
4. Chulliyil SC, Diwan SJ, Sheth MS, Vyas NJ: Correlation of functional independence and quality of life in
school aged children with cerebral palsy. Int J Contemp Pediatr. 2014, 1:32-6. 10.5455/2349-3291
5. Zhang JY, Oskoui M, Shevell M: A population-based study of communication impairment in cerebral palsy. J
Child Neurol. 2015, 30:277-84. 10.1177/0883073814538497
6. Bauer G, Gerstenbrand F, Rumpl E: Varieties of the locked-in syndrome. J Neurol. 1979, 221:77-91.
10.1007/BF00313105
7. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD). (2022).
https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-
disabilities.html.
8. Wolpaw JR, Birbaumer N, McFarland DJ, Pfurtscheller G, Vaughan TM: Brain-computer interfaces for
communication and control. Clin Neurophysiol. 2002, 113:767-91. 10.1016/s1388-2457(02)00057-3
9. Guger C, Spataro R, Allison BZ, Heilinger A, Ortner R, Cho W, La Bella V: Complete locked-in and locked-in
patients: command following assessment and communication with vibro-tactile P300 and motor imagery
brain-computer interface tools. Front Neurosci. 2017, 11:251. 10.3389/fnins.2017.00251
10. Letourneau S, Zewdie ET, Jadavji Z, Andersen J, Burkholder LM, Kirton A: Clinician awareness of brain
computer interfaces: a Canadian national survey. J Neuroeng Rehabil. 2020, 17:2. 10.1186/s12984-019-
0624-7
2022 Jadavji et al. Cureus 14(6): e26215. DOI 10.7759/cureus.26215 12 of 13
11. Zhang J, Jadavji Z, Zewdie E, Kirton A: Evaluating if children can use simple brain computer interfaces.
Front Hum Neurosci. 2019, 13:24. 10.3389/fnhum.2019.00024
12. Jadavji Z, Zhang J, Paffrath B, Zewdie E, Kirton A: Can children with perinatal stroke use a simple brain
computer interface?. Stroke. 2021, 52:2363-70. 10.1161/STROKEAHA.120.030596
13. Daly JJ, Huggins JE: Brain-computer interface: current and emerging rehabilitation applications. Arch Phys
Med Rehabil. 2015, 96:S1-7. 10.1016/j.apmr.2015.01.007
14. Pfurtscheller G, Lopes da Silva FH: Event-related EEG/MEG synchronization and desynchronization: basic
principles. Clin Neurophysiol. 1999, 110:1842-57. 10.1016/s1388-2457(99)00141-8
15. Squires KC, Donchin E, Herning RL, McCarthy G: On the influence of task relevance and stimulus
probability on event-related-potential components. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1977, 42:1-14.
10.1016/0013-4694(77)90146-8
16. Fabiani M, Gratton G, Karis D, Donchin E: Definition, identification, and reliability of measurement of the
P300 component of the event-related brain potential. Adv Psychophysiol. 1987, 2:1-78.
17. McCarthy G, Donchin E: A metric for thought: a comparison of P300 latency and reaction time. Science.
1981, 211:77-80. 10.1126/science.7444452
18. Kutas M, McCarthy G, Donchin E: Augmenting mental chronometry: the P300 as a measure of stimulus
evaluation time. Science. 1977, 197:792-5. 10.1126/science.887923
19. Nijboer F, Birbaumer N, Kübler A: The influence of psychological state and motivation on brain-computer
interface performance in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis - a longitudinal study. Front Neurosci.
2010, 4:10.3389/fnins.2010.00055
20. Lotte F, Larrue F, Mühl C: Flaws in current human training protocols for spontaneous brain-computer
interfaces: lessons learned from instructional design. Front Hum Neurosci. 2013, 7:568.
10.3389/fnhum.2013.00568
21. Shute VJ: Focus on formative feedback. Rev Educ Res. 2008, 78:153-89. 10.3102/0034654307313795
22. Copley J, Ziviani J: Barriers to the use of assistive technology for children with multiple disabilities . Occup
Ther Int. 2004, 11:229-43. 10.1002/oti.213
23. Škola F, Tinková S, Liarokapis F: Progressive training for motor imagery brain-computer interfaces using
gamification and virtual reality embodiment. Front Hum Neurosci. 2019, 13:329. 10.3389/fnhum.2019.00329
24. Plass-Oude Bos D, Reuderink B, Laar B, et al.: Brain-computer interfacing and games. Brain-Computer
Interfaces: Applying Our Minds to Human-Computer Interaction. Tan DS, Nijholt A (ed): Springer, London;
2010. 149-78. 10.1007/978-1-84996-272-8
25. Lim CG, Lee TS, Guan C, et al.: A brain-computer interface based attention training program for treating
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. PLoS One. 2012, 7:e46692. 10.1371/journal.pone.0046692
26. Holloway C, Dawes H: Disrupting the world of disability: the next generation of assistive technologies and
rehabilitation practices. Healthc Technol Lett. 2016, 3:254-6. 10.1049/htl.2016.0087
2022 Jadavji et al. Cureus 14(6): e26215. DOI 10.7759/cureus.26215 13 of 13