Submitted:25August,2021 Accepted:12October,2021 Published:08November,2022 DOI:10.22514/sv.2021.229
COMMENTARY
Digital technology to control COVID-19 in China:
issues, challenges and implications for the healthcare
system
Jianliang Xiao1, Ruilian Zhang2,*
1SchoolofPublicAdministration,Hohai Abstract
University,211100Nanjing,Jiangsu, In the current era, public health crises are presenting new systematic and cross-border
China
2SustainableMineralsInstitute,The characteristics and uncertainty. Public health crises are challenges for governments
UniversityofQueensland,4072 andhealthsystems. Thedevelopmentofdigitaltechnologyhaschangedtheworldand
Brisbane,Australia connecteditasa“village”,anddigitaltechnologyhasplayedacriticalroleinproviding
support during public health crises over the past three decades. From the perspective
*Correspondence
of empowerment theory, we explore the role of digital technology in responding to
ruilian.zhang@uq.edu.au
(RuilianZhang) the COVID-19 pandemic and digital technology approaches to controlling COVID-
19 in China. Accordingly, we identify the challenges of using digital technology to
controlpublichealthcrises,includingtheimbalanceoftherightsandresponsibilitiesof
governancesubjects,theincompatibilityofthegovernancemodelanddigitaltechnology
and the inadequate application of digital technology. Considering implications for the
successfulpreventionandcontrolofCOVID-19,wesuggestthatthegovernmentshould
improvethebalanceofrightsandresponsibilitiesforcoordinatedcrisisgovernance,link
digital technology and the governance system and broaden the grassroots governance
community.
Keywords
Publichealthcrisis;Digitaltechnology;Healthcaresystem;Challenges;COVID-19
1. Introduction mission system and institutional inertia in addressing long-
standingabuses,theimplementationandpromotionofdigital
Around the world, different countries’ development histo- governancemodelshavenotreceivedadequateattention[5,6].
ries,socio-politicalandeconomicsystems,andculturalback-
In the prevention and control of the COVID-19 pandemic,
grounds have determined their different approaches to gov-
the role and functions of digital governance have gradually
ernance. In the face of the global outbreak of coronavirus
been recognized by governments, markets, society and the
disease2019(COVID-19),theresponsestrategiesadoptedby
public. Compared to the management and dissemination of
different countries have varied widely [1]. The governments
information in the traditional public governance model, the
of some countries or regions, in line with practices in China,
digital governance model has the advantage of superimpos-
have adopted active measures to fight the pandemic for all
ing the health crisis and governance crisis to form a double
people, regardless of the cost of saving lives [2]. Some
dilemma [7]. For instance, digital technology has been used
Western governments, such as those of the United Kingdom
not only for diagnosis/monitoring, but also for conducting
andNorway,haveadvocatedapassiveresponsebypromoting
experimentalstudieswhichopenednewvenuesontheimpact
herdimmunity,whichmeansthatsixtypercentofadultsmay
of COVID beyond the mere biology. In particular, digital
have to be infected to achieve collective immunity [3]. For
technology-basedstudieshaveshownthatCOVID-relatedre-
those young people who do not consider the society/herd
strictionsdeterminednegativeeffectsonpsychologicalaspects
immunity, they are bearing the brunt of the next waves. In
suchasemotionalprocessing[8]andbehaviouralaspectssuch
constructingadigitalgovernancemodelandexploringtherule
aseatingattitudes,alsoinhealthypopulations[9].
of law, scholars have clearly stated that it is necessary to
“establishandimprovethesystemandrulesofadministration Existingresearchhasmainlyfocusedontheeffectsofdigital
using the internet, big data, artificial intelligence and other crisis management, which refers to the application of digital
technicalmeansaswellaspromotetheconstructionofdigital technology for crisis management [10, 11]. Some scholars
government,strengthentheorderlysharingofdata,andprotect have pointed out that the health quick response (QR) code
individuals in accordance with the law” [4]. In practice, uses three colours (green, yellow and red) to manage the
however,duetotheimpactofpublicgovernanceonthetrans- health status of residents. This strategy provides an efficient
ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBY4.0license(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
SignaVitae2022 vol.18(6),103-109 ©2022TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyMREPress. http://www.signavitae.com/
104
and flexible approach that can be used to prevent and con- fore being widely used to describe the behaviours of socially
trol the spread of COVID-19 based on personal solutions, disadvantaged groups to gain equal rights and enhance self-
greatlyimprovingtheworkingefficiencyofdigitalcrisisman- control [12]. In short, empowerment refers to a certain ca-
agement [12]. Others have systematically analysed the role pacity and embodied energy. This concept was subsequently
of artificial intelligence, big data, geographical information applied in the fields of business and management from two
systems (GISs), information visualization, image recognition mainperspectives: employeeempowerment,emphasizingthe
and other technologies in pandemic prevention and control decentralizationofmanagerialpowerandmoreemployeeau-
monitoring. Someresearchersbelievethatdigitaltechnology tonomy, and customer empowerment, emphasizing customer
can improve the timeliness of pandemic monitoring and the initiative and constituting the main body of corporate value
pertinenceofpreventionandcontrolmethodssothatdecision- cocreation [15]. The concept of empowerment has natural
making agencies, public health agencies and pandemic pre- applicability to the field of disaster relief and public health
vention agencies can better predict, control, and prevent the crisis management [16, 17]. The self-help perspective in
spread of pandemics among humans, animals and plants and theinitialconceptofempowermentisinstructiveforsubjects
treatinfectedpersons[13,14]. However,theabovementioned facingmajorcrisesanddisasters. Relatedresearchhasfound
research highlights the advantages of technology for digital that through collective action, shared cognition, and collabo-
crisismanagementoperationswhileignoringgoverningbodies rativecontrol,communities(basic-levelorganizations)canbe
aswellasthecharacteristicsoftensionandchallengesthatmay furtherempoweredfordisasterrelief[18].
exist. Therefore,thisstudyexaminestheChinesegovernment
inanefforttorethinkpublicdigitaltechnologyandtoenable 2.2 Theroleofdigitaltechnologyin
theco-governancecrisismanagementprocess. Weaimtocom- respondingtotheCOVID-19pandemic
binegovernmentpracticesinfightingtheCOVID-19outbreak
withdirectionandguidanceforpreventingandcontrollingnew First,inmonitoringandcontrollingthepandemic,digitaltech-
wavesoftheCOVID-19pandemic. nology helps to accurately monitor the dynamics of the pan-
demic,analyseandjudgerisks,andoptimizetheallocationof
We mainly explore the characteristics, approaches, chal-
materials,demonstratingthepowerfuladvantagesofprecision
lengesandimplicationsofusingdigitaltechnologytocontrol
andefficiency[19]. Digitaltechnologycanbeusedforthefull
COVID-19inChina. Ourmajorcontributionofthisresearch
dynamicmonitoringofthehealthofthepopulationbyforming
has enriched the concepts of social action and self-help in
a network of real-time monitoring in a grid system. Once an
empowerment theory. Five sections follow this introduction.
infectedpersonisidentified,thepopulationassociatedwiththe
Section2introducesthetheoryandcharacteristicsofthedigital
infected person can be quickly analysed and closely tracked,
technologyusedinCOVID-19preventionandcontrol. Section
and joint prevention and control can be carried out [20, 21].
3 describes the digital technology approaches to controlling
Bigdataefficientlyintegratesdataresources, minesanalysts’
COVID-19. Section4explainsthechallengesfacingthecon-
tracedatatopredicttheriskofinfection,andhelpsachieveac-
trolofpublichealthcrises. Section5presentstheimplications
curatepandemicpreventionandcontrol. Artificialintelligence
forapplyingdigitaltechnologytocontrolCOVID-19. Section
technologycanbeusedtoimplementhigh-precisionstandards
6concludesthepaper.
for testing virus mutations, to determine the need for virus
boostervaccinations,andtomanagedrugdevelopment[22].
2. The role of digital technology in
Second, in the process of returning to normal life, health
responding to COVID-19
codes, online offices, online education, and purchases and
delivery on behalf of others have brought convenience to
As the first country to deal with the pandemic, China has
people’sproductivityandprivatelives[7,12]. Thehealthcode
shownoutstandingperformanceinmonitoringandpreventing
is one of the major highlights of how digital technology can
thespreadofthepandemic. Theentirecountrywasmobilized,
be used to fight the pandemic. The health code can monitor
and everyone joined in the battle. After a fierce struggle,
notonlythedynamictrajectoryofpeoplebutalsotheirhealth
Chinabecameoneofthefirstcountriesintheworldtocontrol
[13]. Inaddition,digitaltechnologyhashelpedpublicservices,
therapidspreadofthepandemic[6]. Chinanotonlygaineda
onlineoffices,andonlineteachingbecomethenorm,making
criticalwindowforworldwidepandemicpreventionandcon-
itconvenienttopurchasegeneralservicesonlinetoeffectively
trolintheearlystageoftheCOVID-19outbreakanddefended
reducepersonalcontactsandexchangesandthuscontributing
the world’s regional front line for pandemic prevention and
totheeffectivepreventionandcontrolofthepandemic[23].
control but also accumulated experience in the global fight
In regard to the digital health code, for example, the pur-
against the pandemic that has frequently been confirmed by
pose of each country’s health code is to track and monitor
theWorldHealthOrganization[1,2]. Digitaltechnologyplays
users to identify potential risks and to respond in time [12].
a crucial role in controlling inflammatory diseases such as
However,therearedifferencesinspecificmethods. Chinaand
COVID-19 and has left a strong mark on the monitoring and
South Korea belong to one category, other countries belong
controlofthepandemic.
to another category, and the internal health codes of the two
categories differ [14]. The Chinese and South Korean health
2.1 Empowermenttheory
codesaregovernmentmandated;thus,theyarerelativelyrich
The concept of empowerment originated from sociology and in collected data. In South Korea’s early implementation,
first appeared in the fields of social action and self-help be- government agencies were able to obtain user information
105
TABLE 1. Contacttracingappsdevelopedindifferentcountriesandvaccinationstatus.
Country Name Connectionmethod Developmentbody Datamonitoring Voluntary Vaccinationrate
China Healthcode Mobilenetworks Government+Company IDinfo+location+ Yes 76%
tracking
SouthKorea Corona100m Mobilenetworks Government+Company IDinfo+location+ Yes 74%
videomonitor+
creditcardinfo
Singapore Tracetogether Bluetooth Government Anonymoustracking No 79%
(Bluetoothmatch)
USA Contacttracing Bluetooth Google+Apple Anonymoustracking No 63%
(Bluetoothmatch)
UK NHS Bluetooth Government Anonymoustracking No 71%
(Bluetoothmatch)
Germany CoronApp Bluetooth Arago Anonymoustracking No 67%
(Bluetoothmatch)
France StopCovid Bluetooth Government Anonymoustracking No 74%
(Bluetoothmatch)
UAE AIHosn Bluetooth Government Anonymoustracking No 92%
(Bluetoothmatch)
Australia Checkin Mobilenetworks Government Anonymoustracking Yes 62%
(Bluetoothmatch)
Note: Vaccinationratedataareextractedfrom‘OurWorldinData’. Vaccinationrateisbefore1stOctober2021.
and publicly shared location and trajectory information for platform; (3) a collaborative scheduling system for multiple
eachconfirmedperson’spreviousinteractionswithotherusers subjects;and(4)apublicservicesupplysystem.
[20]. China had a similar approach, announcing the daily-
life trajectory of confirmed cases and seeking close contacts 2.4 Multiplesubjectsinvolved
to follow the chain of infection. However, the system exists
COVID-19 pandemic prevention and control involve multi-
mainlyintheformofinformationrelease, andpracticesvary
plegovernancesubjects,suchasthegovernment,enterprises,
in different parts of the country [21]. The main difference
nongovernmental organizations, and citizens [4]. Currently,
in the implementation of health codes in other countries is
theCOVID-19pandemicpreventionandcontrolsystemarea
the governmental approach. The government public health
multidimensionalsystemthatcombinesphysicalspace,social
departments or science and technology departments of Sin-
space and digital space. Physical space reflects pandemic
gapore, France, the United Kingdom, and the United Arab
prevention, and the control system needs to be continuously
Emirates (UAE) are actively developing software, whereas
supplied by the outside world and service exchange [12]. It
those of the United States and Germany are not; however,
includestheplacementofcaserescueandprotection,thesup-
therearenohard-and-fastrulesonmandatoryuse. Peopleare
ply of medical services, and the guarantee of production and
merelyencouragedtoinstallthesoftware[4,5]. TheUAEis
livingmaterials. Socialspacereflectstheoverallplanningand
slightly more formal, emphasizing that people should install
developmentofeconomicandsocialworkunderthepremise
and use this software. In China and South Korea, the most
thatthepandemicpreventionandcontrolsituationisimprov-
fundamentaldifferenceisthatthedatacollectionmethodsrely
ing. Itincludespublicopinionguidancewiththegoalofedu-
onmobilephonesforBluetoothshort-rangeexchangeofdata
catingpublicsentimentandimplementingpreferentialpolicies
and identification with the implementation of the minimum
[14]. Digital space reflects wider and deeper collaboration,
principlestocollectuserdata(seeTable1below).
both to expand the sharing of spatial data and to establish
credible and accurate data to ensure cross-validation of the
2.3 Approachestocontrolling
data governance management mode. For example, after the
COVID-19throughdigitaltechnology
outbreak, health authorities shared information on confirmed
TheCOVID-19pandemicisragingaroundtheworld,anditis andsuspectedcases. Thepublicsecuritydepartmentcollected
anotherpublichealthcrisisfollowingsevereacuterespiratory informationaboutclosecontactamongpeopleassociatedwith
syndrome (SARS) in 2003 that has tested governance. In particular vehicles, and the transportation sector compared
the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic, in which digital personal tracking information with vehicle information and
technology is fully involved, the actions of the Chinese gov- airport and railway station usage information. Multisectoral
ernment, enterprises, society, and citizens reflect many char- collaborationprovidescriticalinformationonconfirmedcases
acteristicsofthecoordinatedgovernanceofpubliccrises: (1) andslowsthespreadofCOVID-19[5].
multiplesubjectsinvolved;(2)anopenandsharedinformation Inaddition,theCOVID-19pandemicpreventionandcontrol
106
systemhasnonlinearcharacteristics. Itinvolvesmultiplepar- 2.6 Thecollaborativeschedulingsystemfor
ticipants,suchasadministrativesystems,medicalinstitutions, multiplesubjects
enterprises, and community residents, among whom interac-
From the perspective of collaborative governance theory,
tions are complicated and not simply linear [7]. This system
the goal of the collaborative governance of public crises is
may be constructed in two or even multidirectional ways,
to achieve synergy among various subsystems. In the fight
suchasnegotiation,cooperationorcompetition. Furthermore,
against COVID-19, due to digital technology intervention
although the number of digital technologies has gradually
in the market supply, emergency rescue services, the
deepenedthegovernancesystem,atthebeginningofthecrisis,
government, internet companies, and volunteer organizations
there was no particular manifestation of digital governance
couldcollaboratetosupportallkindsofresources,production,
[14]. Forexample,thedistributionofreliefsupplieswasstill
system chips, supply and use to meet various needs [15].
stuckintheeraoflettersofintroduction,andthetimeneeded
In terms of market supply, in response to the problem of
forpandemicnotificationwassubjecttodelays. Theseissues
vegetable supply in some areas affected by the pandemic,
reflectedtheexistenceoftraditionalgovernancestructuresand
the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs issued an
changes in the social system that would inevitably lead to
emergencynoticeonJanuary29, 2020, requiringagricultural
incorrect uses of sophisticated digital technology. Therefore,
and rural departments at all levels to formulate emergency
for the COVID-19 pandemic prevention and control system
plans, increase productivity, and cooperate with the relevant
to achieve and maintain an orderly and stable structure, it
departmentstoensureanadequatevegetablesupply[6]. This
was necessary to upgrade the collaboration system through
vegetable supply provided solid material guarantees for the
informationsharingandcooperationamongmultiplesubjects
fight against the pandemic. In terms of emergency rescue,
[15].
whenthepandemicbrokeout,22nationalemergencymedical
rescueteamsfromdifferentprovincesrushedtoHubei,where
theywerestationedatvariousshelterhospitalsandbecamethe
2.5 Theopenandsharedinformation
mainforcefortreatingpatients[1]. Thelevelofprivaterescue
platform
isreflectedinthefactthatvolunteersfromalloverthecountry
usetheonline+offlineservicemodeltoquicklymeetvarious
Asapubliccrisis,theCOVID-19pandemichascross-regional
emergency rescue needs. Online services provide support
characteristics; thus, there was an urgent need to establish a
mainly for needs assessment and psychological counselling
cross-regionalcoordinationapproachtodealwithgovernance
for people in the hardest-hit areas of the pandemic. Offline
challenges [19]. The problem of collaborative governance is
services,mainlycharitabledonations,materialoperationsand
the integration of data and the sharing of information. Only
public services, have played an important role in additional
by effectively integrating information and making it publicly
servicesforprofessionalteams[7].
known on a shared platform can data references be provided
for subsequent collaborative actions and for research on and
2.7 Thepublicservicesupplysystem
theassessment,preventionandcontrolofthepandemicinthe
early and medium terms as well as the subsequent recovery Inthispandemic,themainproblemhasbeenthecontradiction
period[20]. betweenlimitedservicesandunlimiteddemand. Ifpublicser-
viceresourcesareexportedonlybythegovernment,problems
After the outbreak of the pandemic, 28 provinces, suchasbottlenecks,resourceoverloadandlimitedoutputoc-
autonomous regions, and municipalities across the country cur,promptingallgovernanceentitiestoreachaconsensus:the
cooperated with Alibaba to launch the Digital Pandemic government,themarket,andsociety,assourcesofthepublic
Prevention System [4]. The system is divided into four servicesupply,mustjointlybeartheunlimiteddemandforser-
mainmodules: residents, communitystreets,medicaldisease vicesduringtemporarypandemicoutbreaks[1,2]. Therefore,
control, and government management. The content includes with the help of digital technology, the government’s mobile
pandemic information collection, active declaration and government, the platform economy of internet companies,
pandemic clue provision, and real-time pandemic tracking. and the grid governance of the community coordinated and
In addition, AutoNavi launched the COVID-19 Pandemic cogoverned to jointly respond to people’s service needs and
Map to help determine the location of confirmed cases and resource requests. During the special period of pandemic
to publish the population density heat map to provide action preventionandcontrol,toensuretheorderlyprogressofpro-
guidelines for necessary travel [5]. Baidu Maps and many duction and life, the governments of Guangdong, Zhejiang,
other technology companies launched the patient peer query Shanghai,Fujianandotherprovincesandcitiesgavefullplay
tool, which helps provide emotional relief to the public. tomobilegovernmentaffairs, advocatingtheimplementation
Meanwhile, information sharing further strengthened the ofonenetworktohandleservicesthatarefrequentlyusedand
supervision of pandemic prevention and control among urgentlyneededbycitizensandsimplifyingandoptimizingthe
the masses. The uninterrupted 5G live broadcast of the onlineserviceprocess[14].
construction of the Huoshenshan and Leishenshan hospitals Atthesametime,localgovernmentssuccessivelylaunched
by China Central Television’s (CCTV’s) caused spectators services related to pandemic prevention and control through
of the construction process to become the strongest cloud serviceportalssuchasWeChatandAlipayMiniProgrammes,
supervisorinhistory[15]. providing services such as pandemic dynamics, protection
information,pandemicrumours,onlinefreeclinics,andfever
107
clinics. The provision of such services enabled people at the has enabled social governance in the field based on the con-
grassroots level to grasp the current situation of prevention tinued strong development of broad prospects [12]. With
and control in a timely manner, resolved doubts, answered thedeepeningapplicationofdigitalapproachesandtherapid
questions, and objectively soothed the social emotions that upgradingofdigitalcapabilities,digitallyenabledpublicgov-
emergedduringthisextraordinaryperiod[22]. ernancediffersfromthefunction-centredconceptofthetradi-
In particular, community grid management is an important tionalgovernancemodel. Itincreasinglyemphasizesacitizen-
link in the fight against the pandemic. Because COVID-19 centred strategy, with the aim of improving governance effi-
has the characteristics of human-to-human transmission, the ciencyandoptimizingthecustomerexperienceofpublicser-
state passed requirements for residents to congregate as little vices[15]. Thismeansthatthesocialgovernancemodelshould
as possible and to stay home; thus, it was able to take full be compatible with digital technology in a downward-facing
advantage of community grid digital platforms. Externally, and inclusive reform. However, the current collaborative
the community grid and government made it convenient for governance crisis model has not completely broken through
gridmemberstoreportthepandemicsituationtotheplatform the operational logic of the traditional administrative system
in a timely manner. Internally, community grid members and it has encountered obstacles related to compatibility and
can receive feedback from residents at any time through the matchingwithdigitaltechnology[4,5].
platform[24,25]. Additionally,thereisalackofunifiedcalibrationandstan-
dards in the construction of government information systems
3. Challenges facing the control of arelacking, resultinginrepeatedreconstructionandthefrag-
public health crises mented distribution of data resources. It makes difficult to
realize a cross-regional and cross-departmental information
3.1 Theimbalanceoftherightsand interconnection [14]. The reason is that participants in dif-
responsibilitiesofgovernancesubjectsina ferent regions, levels and departments have not yet formed a
publichealthcrisis mature sharing mechanism. For example, in the early stage
ofthepandemic,itwasdifficulttoestablishacompletechain
The collaborative crisis governance structure based on dig-
for the emergency logistics system based on informatization
ital technology uses multiple nodes to jointly maintain data
and big data due to local card setting, road segmentation and
anddevelopsacorrespondingpowerallocationanddecision-
even regional discrimination. This difficulty led to delays
making approach. This approach requires the organizational
in emergency logistics, a supply-demand mismatch and low
structureofcollaborativegovernancetoconsiderboththehor-
efficiency[3]. Additionally,thegovernmentsinsomeregions
izontalandverticaldimensionsoforganizationaldesign. The
fought their own battles, formulated various local policies
horizontaldimensioninvolvestherealizationofcollaborative
and focused on their own pandemic prevention software and
governance through information exchange, resource sharing,
systems,whichmadeitdifficultforthemtobecompatibleand
and joint action among different departments and subjects.
coordinatedwithotherjurisdictions.
Theverticaldimensioninvolvesthepromotionofcollaborative
governance through authoritative guidance and hierarchical
connections [2]. However, due to unclear rights and respon- 3.3 Theinadequateapplicationofdigital
sibilities, governance subjects will have problems with each technology
other,leadingtoineffectivedecision-making. Thissituationis
Intheearlystageofpandemicpreventionandcontrol,digital
particularlyevidentinthehorizontalcoordinationrelationship.
technology lacked the last mile in terms of its intervention
The multiple legal subjects involved experience a lack of
in collaborative crisis management. As a result, technol-
clearlydefinedstatusandmeansforcrisismanagement;thus,
ogy,products,andservicesfailedtosinktothegrassrootslevel
therightsofparticipantsareunclearandnotstandardized[4].
[21]. For example, in Hubei Province, where the pandemic
Theregulationofthestatusisthere,andyetthetransmissionof
situation was serious, those collecting community household
thevirushasbeenextremelyfast. Knowledgemanagementand
information and statistics needed to make up lessons on the
coordinationwillhelpalleviatethebottlenecks. Forexample,
spot due to residents’ inability to grasp basic information.
regarding the early assessment and warning of the COVID-
There was a time lag between the release and implementa-
19pandemic,first,thelawhadextremelyvaguerequirements
tion of documents for the benefit of the people related to the
for experts from the Center for Disease Control and Preven-
pandemic situation and the community [14]. The allocation
tion (CDC) to respond to public health event [5]. Second,
ofreliefmaterialsstoppedattheRedCrossbecausetherewas
the lack of practical operational norms made it difficult for
noletterofintroduction. Suchproblemsrevealthatthereare
expertstoenterthepandemicassessmentanddecision-making
still weak links in the construction of digital infrastructure
mechanisminatimelymannerinresponsetothephenomenon
at the grassroots level. There are three main reasons. First,
ofhuman-to-humantransmission. Thisdifficultydelayedthe
thegrassrootslevelandhigherlevelshavenotyetestablished
optimalperiodforpandemicmanagementandcontrol.
a functional data sharing system [1, 2]. Second, grassroots
governanceisstillinthestageoffillingoutformstofightthe
3.2 Difficultiesinthecompatibilityofthe
pandemic,manualoperationandmultilevelmanagement. The
governancemodelanddigitaltechnology
segmentationofvariousdepartmentsisaseriousproblem,re-
DigitaltechnologyhasshoneinthefightagainsttheCOVID- sultinginredundantworkandlowefficiency. Third,formalist
19pandemicowingtoagreatreleaseofenergyandbecauseit thinkingstillexists,condoningcertainphenomenaofmediocre
108
andlazygovernment[4,5]. we should build a health big data sharing platform between
grassrootsunitsandlocalmedicalinstitutionsandhigher-level
4. Implications medicalinstitutionstopreventresidentsfromestablishingnew
diagnosis and treatment records and health files at any time
4.1 Balancetherightsandresponsibilityfor when they are in different places. In this way, higher-level
differentstakeholders andsubordinatehospitalscansmoothlycarryouttelemedicine
[1, 2]. In summary, sinking good technologies and products
Theessenceofcollaborativegovernanceisthediversification
verified by the market to the grassroots level and making
ofgovernancesubjects,whichmeansthatpowershouldbeal-
them available to the public will help to broaden the welfare
locatedtomarkets,socialorganizationsandcitizensoutsidethe
coverageofdigitaltechnology[30,31].
government,andthatthecorrespondingresponsibilitiesshould
be assigned [1, 2]. In particular, digital economy platform
5. Conclusions
must be used to build two-way information communication.
It is critical to mobilize enterprises, non-profit organizations, COVID-19 not only threatens human health but also has a
citizens and other entities outside the government to partic- major adverse effect on social development. In fighting the
ipate in collaborative crisis management, build a larger and pandemicandprotectingthelivesofcitizens,medicalworkers,
broadercrisispreventionandcontrolinformationplatform,and biomedical experts and relevant pandemic prevention units
improvetheemergencymaterialallocationmechanismbased havepaidaheavyprice[24]. Loopholesinpublichealthand
onclearresponsibilitiesandrights[26,27]. Additionally,itis pandemic prevention systems have been highlighted. In this
necessarytoimprovetheassessmentandevaluationincentive research,weidentifythechallengesofusingdigitaltechnology
mechanismfornongovernmentalentitiesthatactivelypartici- to control public health crises, including an imbalance of
pateinthecollaborativegovernanceofcrisesandfulfilsocial the rights and responsibilities of governance subjects, dif-
responsibilities. Thus, material incentives, such as financial ficulties in the compatibility of the governance model and
support and spiritual incentives, such as authorization and digital technology and the inadequate application of digital
praise,mustbeprovided[28]. technology[1]. Consideringtheimplicationsforthesuccessful
prevention and control of COVID-19, we suggest that the
4.2 Linkdigitaltechnologyandthe government should balance the rights and responsibility for
governancesystem crisis governance stakeholders, link digital technology and
systemsandbroadenthecommunityofgrassrootsgovernance.
Thekeytocollaborativegovernanceistoreversethesituation
At present, COVID-19 has spread to more than 100 coun-
of separate governance. To promote information sharing and
tries and regions. Many countries failed to achieve effective
businesscollaboration,itisnecessarytoimplementalinkage
prevention and control in the early stage of the pandemic,
mechanism between digital technology and the governance
leadingtotherapidspreadofthedisease[2]. Infacingthedelta
system[29]. Itiscriticaltoallowtechnologytosupportsocial
strainofCOVID-19,itisimportanttopursuethecorrectpathto
collaborativegovernancethroughtheoptimizationofinternal
savelivesandtoenabletheeconomytorecoverbyreviewing
mechanismandtheinnovationofexternalmeans. Atthetech-
possibleimprovementstothehealthsystem. Fromourcitizen’s
nicallevel,weshouldbuildmultidimensionaldataaggregation
view,theapplicationofdigitaltechnologytocontrolthespread
and drive business collaboration digital platforms [24]. At
ofCOVID-19isnecessaryandcriticalinChinaalthoughithas
the system level, a unified framework should be formed for
been criticised by Western medias. Furthermore, the digital
horizontalmultidepartmentjointconstructionprojects. Verti-
approachhascontributedtotracingclosecontacts,savinglives
caljointconstructionprojectsbetweenthecentralgovernment
andslowingthespreadofCOVID-19. Ascitizensaffected,our
andlocalgovernmentsmustbecoordinated[15].
personalprivacymighthavetobesacrificedintheprocessof
trackingthisdisease. Therefore,itiscrucialtofindtheoptimal
4.3 Broadenthegrassrootscommunity
balance to control the pandemic without major economic or
governance
personalsacrifices.
Refined governance is the future trend of social governance.
Refined governance must realize not only the transformation
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
of governance units from the macro to the micro level but
also the transformation of governance from a resource flow JX—Conceptualization; Writing-original draft; Writing-
to a data sharing model [4]. Therefore, communities must reviewing & editing; Funding acquisition; RZ—
be considered the last mile of collaborative governance to Conceptualization; Writing-original draft; Writing-reviewing
bring services to local communities [5]. In practice, first, &editing;Supervision.
weshouldbeskilledatusingdigitaltechnologiessuchasbig
datatoestablishadigitalofficesystemthatisinterconnected
ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO
between rural areas and communities, townships and streets
and we should expand this system to public service fields PARTICIPATE
related to health. Second, we should change the means of Notapplicable.
collecting grassroots data from traditional means of tabular
collection to digital means of intelligent apps [13]. Third,
109
ACKNOWLEDGMENT Employees’RolesinServiceOrganizations.JournalofServiceResearch.
2000;3:66–81.
Thankstoallthepeerreviewersfortheiropinionsandsugges- [16] Sun J. Precise efforts and proactive actions to give full play to the
tions. key role of big data applications in pandemic prevention and control
[EB/OL].2020.Availableat:https://www.chinathinktanks.org.
cn/content/detail/id/l1xtkp51(Accessed:2November2021).
FUNDING [17] BeaunoyerE,DupéréS,GuittonMJ.COVID-19anddigitalinequalities:
Reciprocal impacts and mitigation strategies. Computers in Human
This research was funded by the Research Innovation Pro- Behavior.2020;111:106424.
gramforCollegeGraduatesofJiangsuProvince,grantnumber [18] Kwok AH, Becker J, Paton D, Hudson-Doyle E, Johnston D. Stake-
KYZZ_0158. holders’ Perspectives of Social Capital in Informing the Development
of Neighborhood-Based Disaster Resilience Measurements. Journal of
AppliedSocialScience.2019;13:26–57.
[19] Hassounah M, Raheel H, Alhefzi M. Digital Response During the
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
COVID-19 Pandemic in Saudi Arabia. Journal of Medical Internet
Theauthorsdeclarenoconflictofinterest. Research.2020;22:e19338.
[20] HeW,ZhangZ,LiW.Informationtechnologysolutions,challenges,and
suggestionsfortacklingtheCOVID-19pandemic.InternationalJournal
ofInformationManagement.2021;57:102287.
REFERENCES
[21] IntawongK,OlsonD,ChariyalertsakS.Applicationtechnologytofight
[1] Xing C, Zhang R. COVID-19 in China: Responses, Challenges and theCOVID-19pandemic:LessonslearnedinThailand.Biochemicaland
ImplicationsfortheHealthSystem.Healthcare.2021;9:82. BiophysicalResearchCommunications.2021;534:830–836.
[2] Zhang J, Zhang R. COVID-19 in China: Power, Transparency and [22] Sun Z, Cheng X, Zhang R, Yang B. Factors Influencing Rumour Re-
GovernanceinPublicHealthCrisis.Healthcare.2020;8:288. Spreading in a Public Health Crisis by the Middle-Aged and Elderly
[3] YuanB,JianW,HeL,WangB,BalabanovaD.Theroleofhealthsystem Populations.InternationalJournalofEnvironmentalResearchandPublic
governanceinstrengtheningtheruralhealthinsurancesysteminChina. Health.2020;17:6542.
InternationalJournalforEquityinHealth.2017;16:44. [23] SunZ,YangB,ZhangR,ChengX.InfluencingFactorsofUnderstanding
[4] QiaoY,SunZ.Onactivegovernment-acomparativestudyofgovernment COVID-19RisksandCopingBehaviorsamongtheElderlyPopulation.
models under market economy conditions. Journal of Jiangnan Social InternationalJournalofEnvironmentalResearchandPublicHealth.2020;
University.2001;02:33–37. 17:5889.
[5] LingJ,HouC.From“activegovernment”to“self-controlgovernment”: [24] PapouliE,ChatzifotiouS,TsairidisC.Theuseofdigitaltechnologyat
theportraitofgovernmentinmodernuniversitygovernanceinthenew homeduringtheCOVID-19outbreak:Viewsofsocialworkstudentsin
era.FudanEducationForum.2020;18:32–38. Greece.SocialWorkEducation.2020;39:1107–1115.
[6] BurkiT.China’ssuccessfulcontrolofCOVID-19.TheLancetInfectious [25] ShahSGS,NoguerasD,vanWoerdenHC,KiparoglouV.TheCOVID-19
Diseases.2020;20:1240–1241. Pandemic:APandemicofLockdownLonelinessandtheRoleofDigital
[7] GuoX,LiuB.WinningFast:TheNationalGovernanceSysteminCrisis Technology.JournalofMedicalInternetResearch.2020;22:e22287.
Management——TakingtheresponsetotheCOVID-19pandemicasan [26] TingDSW,CarinL,DzauV,WongTY.DigitaltechnologyandCOVID-
example.ZhongzhouAcademicJournal.2020;04:10–19.(InChinese) 19.NatureMedicine.2020;26:459–461.
[8] CecchettoC,AielloM,GentiliC,IontaS,OsimoSA.Increasedemotional [27] Vargo D, Zhu L, Benwell B, Yan Z. Digital technology use during
eatingduringCOVID-19associatedwithlockdown,psychologicaland COVID‐19pandemic: Arapidreview.HumanBehaviorandEmerging
socialdistress.Appetite.2021;160:105122. Technologies.2021;3:13–24.
[9] Osimo SA, Aiello M, Gentili C, Ionta S, Cecchetto C. The Influence [28] Wang J, Zhang R. COVID-19 in Rural China: Features, Challenges
of Personality, Resilience, and Alexithymia on Mental Health During andImplicationsfortheHealthcareSystem.JournalofMultidisciplinary
COVID-19Pandemic.FrontiersinPsychology.2021;12:630751. Healthcare.2021;14:1045–1051.
[10] PanX.Applicationofpersonal-orienteddigitaltechnologyinpreventing [29] WhitelawS,MamasMA,TopolE,VanSpallHGC.Applicationsofdigital
transmission of COVID-19, China. Irish Journal of Medical Science technologyinCOVID-19pandemicplanningandresponse.TheLancet
(1971-).2020;189:1145–1146. DigitalHealth.2020;2:e435–e440.
[11] Kapoor A, Guha S, Kanti Das M, Goswami KC, Yadav R. Digital [30] HopmanJ,AllegranziB,MehtarS.ManagingCOVID-19inLow-and
healthcare: the only solution for better healthcare during COVID-19 Middle-IncomeCountries.JournaloftheAmericanMedicalAssociation.
pandemic?IndianHeartJournal.2020;72:61–64. 2020;323:1549.
[12] YeZ,WangL,TianH.Digitalgovernmentanddatagovernancefromthe [31] AhmadAR,MuradHR.TheImpactofSocialMediaonPanicduring
perspectiveofgovernmentresponsibilitysystemconstruction.Chinese theCOVID-19PandemicinIraqiKurdistan:OnlineQuestionnaireStudy.
Administration.2018;7:57–62. JournalofMedicalInternetResearch.2020;22:e19556.
[13] MurrayCJL,AlamroNMS,HwangH,LeeU.Digitalpublichealthand
COVID-19.TheLancetPublicHealth.2020;5:e469–e470.
Howtocitethisarticle:JianliangXiao,RuilianZhang.Digital
[14] ChengYD,YuJ,ShenY,HuangB.CoproducingResponsestoCOVID
technologytocontrolCOVID-19inChina:issues,challengesand
‐19 with Community‐Based Organizations: Lessons from Zhejiang
implicationsforthehealthcaresystem.SignaVitae.2022;18(6):
Province,China.PublicAdministrationReview.2020;80:866–873.
103-109.doi:10.22514/sv.2021.229.
[15] ChebatJ,KolliasP.TheImpactofEmpowermentonCustomerContact