JMIR CARDIO Tadas et al
Original Paper
Transitions in Technology-Mediated Cardiac Rehabilitation and
Self-management: Qualitative Study Using the Theoretical
Domains Framework
Shreya Tadas1, MSc; Claudette Pretorius1, PhD; Emma J Foster2, BSc, BMedSci, MBChB; Trish Gorely3, PhD;
Stephen J Leslie4, PhD; David Coyle1, PhD
1School of Computer Science, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
2Cardiac Unit, NHS Highland, Inverness, United Kingdom
3Department of Nursing and Midwifery, University of the Highlands and Islands, Inverness, United Kingdom
4School of Health, Social Care and Life Sciences, University of the Highlands and Islands, Inverness, United Kingdom
Corresponding Author:
Shreya Tadas, MSc
School of Computer Science, University College Dublin
Belfield
Dublin, 4
Ireland
Phone: 353 899882380
Email: shreya.tadas@ucdconnect.ie
Abstract
Background: An acute cardiac incident is a life-changing event that often necessitates surgery. Although surgery has high
success rates, rehabilitation, behavioral changes, and self-care are critical to long-term health. Recent systematic reviews have
highlighted the potential of technology in this area; however, significant shortcomings have also been identified, particularly with
regard to patient experience.
Objective: This study aims to improve future systems and to explore the experiences of cardiac patients during key phases after
hospitalization: recuperation, initial rehabilitation, and long-term self-management. The key objective is to provide a holistic
understanding of behavioral factors that impact people across these phases, understand how experiences evolve over time, and
provide user-centered recommendations to improve the design of cardiac rehabilitation and self-management technologies.
Methods: Semistructured interviews were conducted with people who attended rehabilitation programs following hospitalization
for acute cardiac events. Interviews were developed and data were analyzed via the Theoretical Domains Framework, a pragmatic
framework that synthesizes prior theories of behavioral change.
Results: Three phases that arise posthospitalization were examined, namely, recuperation, rehabilitation, and long-term
self-management. Through these phases, we describe the impact of key factors and important changes that occur in patients’
experiences over time, including the desire for and redefinition of normal life, the need for different types of formal and informal
knowledge, the benefits of safe zoning and connectedness, and the need to recognize capability. The use of the Theoretical
Domains Framework allows us to show how factors that influence behavior evolve over time and to identify potential sources of
tension.
Conclusions: This study provides empirically grounded recommendations for the design of technology-mediated cardiac
rehabilitation and self-management systems. Key recommendations include the use of technology to support a normal life,
leveraging social influences to extend participants’sense of normality, the use of technology to provide a safe zone, the need to
support both emotional and physical well-being, and a focus on recognizing capability and providing recommendations that are
positive and reinforce this capability.
(JMIR Cardio 2021;5(2):e30428) doi: 10.2196/30428
KEYWORDS
cardiac rehabilitation; self-management; self-care; behavioral change; Theoretical Domains Framework; qualitative methods;
mobile phone
https://cardio.jmir.org/2021/2/e30428 JMIR Cardio 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e30428 | p. 1
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR CARDIO Tadas et al
It may include clinical assessment, medication review, risk
Introduction
factor modification, psychological support, and supervised
exercise [3]. After a person is hospitalized and after discharge,
Background
they go through a recuperation period (Figure 1). Many patients
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a leading cause of morbidity
attend rehabilitation programs. Individualized cardiac
and mortality worldwide, with an estimated 17.9 million deaths
rehabilitation programs are usually for a duration of 6-8 weeks
each year [1]. CVDs are a group of disorders of the heart and
and comprise a mix of monitored exercises and educational
blood vessels, usually associated with a buildup of fatty deposits
sessions. Following these initial stages, people must continue
inside the arteries that occur when the flow of oxygen-rich blood
self-management. According to Barlow et al [4],
to the heart is blocked, leading to increased strain on the heart
“self-management refers to the individual’s ability to manage
[2]. Four out of five cardiac-related deaths are due to acute
the symptoms, treatment, physical and psychological
events, such as heart attacks and strokes. One-third of these
consequences and lifestyle changes.” Many people face
deaths occur prematurely in people under 70 years of age [1].
emotional and physical challenges during the transition from
Fortunately, the success rate of modern cardiac surgery and
hospitalization to self-management [5]. For successful and
nonsurgical interventions, such as percutaneous coronary
long-term self-management, behavior and behavioral change
intervention (stent insertion), is high. As a result, an increasing
play a central role [6]. Evidence suggests that rehabilitation
number of people live with CVD as a long-term chronic
programs can play a vital role in the transition from
condition. Following acute events, which are often sudden,
hospitalization to self-care [7]. Despite the proven benefits,
ongoing treatment for CVD involves lifestyle changes and
uptake and adherence in traditional face-to-face programs are
medicines. Cardiac rehabilitation is considered a vital part of
often low due to barriers such as lack of awareness, transport,
long-term recovery and a key component of patient management.
motivation, cost, and poor social support [8].
Figure 1. Participants’journey after their cardiac event.
Recent systematic reviews have highlighted the potential of of people’s experiences of recuperation, rehabilitation, and
digital health interventions to support rehabilitation and self-management, their attitude toward technology, and the ways
subsequent self-management of cardiovascular conditions in which it could better support rehabilitation and self-care. The
[9-11]. However, significant shortcomings were identified. analysis is framed via the Theoretical Domains Framework
Evidence suggests that tightly supervised intervention programs (TDF), an integrated theoretical framework synthesized from
are most successful and that self-directed management is less 33 prior theories of behavioral change. The key strength of the
successful due to problems with engagement and adherence. TDF is that it provides a rigorous and comprehensive framework
Piette et al [10] highlighted the need for future interventions to to identify factors that impact behavior and behavioral change.
incorporate advances in behavioral theories and artificial Our analysis was grounded in a semistructured interview study
intelligence in order to be more effective and adaptive to the with 19 participants who were hospitalized following an acute
changing needs of patients. Despite recent calls for technology cardiac incident and subsequently attended a cardiac
that supports personalization and focuses on user needs, Tadas rehabilitation program.
et al [11] found that, with notable exceptions, prior research in
Our research questions include:
the cardiovascular domain has made limited use of user-centered
approaches. This is consistent with the findings of Siegers et al 1. What were the key experiences of patients after cardiac
[12], who also reported that most developers of digital surgery and how did these experiences support or hinder
interventions for cardiac self-management did not engage with rehabilitation and ongoing self-management?
the direct experiences of patients, such as those who have 2. How did the experiences of patients change over different
attended rehabilitation programs. Prior studies have also tended phases of recuperation, rehabilitation, and self-management?
to focus on specific aspects of self-management, such as 3. What strategies can be applied in design to better support
physical activity [13] and medication management [9,14]. They technology-mediated cardiac rehabilitation and
do not provide a holistic understanding of the behavioral factors self-management?
that impact people throughout recuperation, rehabilitation, and
Related Work
self-management.
Overview
This paper builds on recent research on posthospital transitions
[5,15] and on rehabilitation and self-management in chronic The work presented in this paper builds on existing research in
conditions [16,17]. It responds directly to calls for research in a number of key areas, including literature on posthospitalization
the cardiovascular domain to engage more deeply with both transitions and support, rehabilitation, and self-management in
behavioral change theories and with patient experience. The chronic conditions, and theories and frameworks for behavioral
contributions of this paper include a comprehensive assessment change. We begin with an overview of key recent work specific
https://cardio.jmir.org/2021/2/e30428 JMIR Cardio 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e30428 | p. 2
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR CARDIO Tadas et al
to cardiovascular care and then consider related work outside [23], virtual rehabilitation programs [24], medication
of the cardiovascular domain. In addition to research in the management [14], and heart rate and blood pressure monitoring
health domain and reflecting the emphasis in the paper on [25-27]. Although recent digital apps show effective results,
understanding user experience, we consider relevant literature self-management and rehabilitation using digital apps generally
in the field of human-computer interaction (HCI). show a gradual decline in use over time due to resistance to
behavioral change and lack of motivation [14]. Investigations
Technology in Cardiovascular Care
by Maitland et al [28] on the role of self-monitoring found an
Technology-mediated cardiovascular rehabilitation and overall reluctance toward unnecessary self-monitoring and
self-management has generally been provided through mobile suggested that technology should focus on self-awareness and
apps, web apps, sensors, or an integration of these [11]. These self-determination. Overall, there is a need for more research
systems aim to increase adherence, motivation, and engagement directly examining the experiences of people after cardiac events
through different means, including gamification, guidance, and in relation to digital tools to support cardiac rehabilitation and
education about the condition, reminders, and data tracking self-management.
through sensors. Most of these studies have focused on
The HCI community, which promotes and practices
interventions to increase physical activity and exercise. Some
user-centered design methods, has relatively less research on
aim to provide a medium for better communication and data
technologies for cardiac conditions, an observation also noted
sharing between patients and care providers, nurses, or health
by Nunes et al [17] in their comprehensive review of HCI
professionals. A small number facilitate remote cardiac
research on self-care technologies. Of the 30 studies included
rehabilitation. A recent systematic review [9] concluded that
in their review, only 3 addressed cardiac conditions. Diabetes
mobile apps in particular offer an important opportunity to
was found to be the most common condition addressed by the
improve access to secondary prevention for cardiac patients,
HCI research on self-care technologies. Examples of self-care
but also concluded that this potential has not been achieved to
technology used for diabetes management include the
date. The authors stress the need for personalized and
AssistingInsulin smartphone app by Preuveneers et al [29],
user-friendly apps that can cater to the needs of individual
which recommends insulin dosages based on predictions of the
patients from different age groups. A systematic review of
user’s activity, and exploration of contextual frames by Raj et
mobile health apps for CVD, including commercially available
al [30] that demonstrates the relationship between context and
apps, by Athilingam et al [18] identified a trend toward
behavior and the importance of context-aware apps for
cost-effectiveness and potential solutions for symptom
self-management. Furthermore, recent research shows an
monitoring and promoting patient engagement in their own
increasing demand for self-management technology that
homes. However, evidence of impact on heart failure–related
supports people’s mundane activities and informal ways of
outcomes is inconclusive. The review also found that most apps
exercise [31]. Significant research also exists in the space of
focused on monitoring patients’ symptoms and activity but
self-management technologies aimed at addressing chronic
provided limited feedback on unusual or irregular events.
disease management in older adults [16,32,33]. For example,
Andersen et al [19] emphasized the importance of aligning
the study on managing multimorbidity in older adults by Doyle
concerns of patients and clinicians and proposed three key
et al [16], suggests the need for self-management apps to
concepts to consider while designing eHealth systems: the
primarily focus on information support and teaching how to
system should be meaningful and actionable to both clinicians
self-manage. There is also a growing body of work targeted at
and patients and feasible within the organizational and social
supporting chronic obstructive pulmonary disease therapy and
context. Another study by Andersen et al [20] demonstrated the
training at home with the use of sensors, smartphones, television,
use of user-centered design methods for reintroducing patients
and webcams [34,35]. Research in this area demonstrates the
as active diagnostic agents to design a collaborative digital tool
increasing accuracy of smartphone-based training apps and their
for monitoring heart patients after hospitalization. This study
acceptance. Existing research on other chronic conditions has
emphasizes the importance of increasing patient participation
clear relevance for the cardiovascular domain. However, to be
in the design of eHealth systems and telemonitoring practices.
most effective, we require a detailed understanding of the
Similar studies on posthospital transitions in chronic patients
specific requirements of the people experiencing CVD.
describe how discharged patients are often unprepared to
self-manage their condition at home [5]. Being discharged from Theoretical Domains Framework
hospital meant a transition from a safe environment at the
Behavioral change theories and methodologies have been widely
hospital to an unknown environment at home [15,21]. The
applied to guide the design of technical systems and evaluation
transition of people with cardiac conditions from hospital after
strategies [36-38]. A systematic review exploring the potential
surgery to their homes is equally likely to create challenges and
of web-based self-management programs found that systems
design opportunities, which this paper seeks to address; there
that incorporated behavioral change techniques were more
is a need for more participatory and iterative approaches to
effective than those that did not, and that web-based systems
design patient-centered eHealth systems [19,22]. A qualitative
were more effective than no intervention [39]. There are many
systematic review by Tadas et al [11] identified the limited use
theoretical models of behavior, including the Health Belief
of user-centered design methods and theoretical models to guide
Model [40], the theory of reasoned action [41], the theory of
the design of technology for cardiovascular care.
planned behavior [41], and the social cognitive theory [42].
Digital apps for cardiac-specific rehabilitation and Although a large number of theoretical models present
self-management are focused on physical activity monitoring opportunities, they also create challenges. Many theories either
https://cardio.jmir.org/2021/2/e30428 JMIR Cardio 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e30428 | p. 3
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR CARDIO Tadas et al
include a small number of constructs or share common or
Methods
overlapping constructs, such as intention, social norms, beliefs,
or control or self-efficacy. Therefore, in some cases, it is difficult
Overview
to decipher which the most appropriate factors to target are in
We conducted semistructured interviews with people who had
behavioral change interventions. In other cases, it is also possible
been hospitalized due to a cardiac event and subsequently
that the key determinants of the target behavior are not
attended supervised rehabilitation programs. Interviews were
represented. TDF [10,43] was developed in response to these
framed using TDF and explored participants’ journeys and
challenges, in an effort to assimilate overlapping constructs in
experiences after hospitalization, their cardiac rehabilitation
a pragmatic framework and to improve researchers’access to
experiences, and their attitudes toward technology. Thereafter,
and application of psychological theory.
as supported by the TDF guidelines, we performed an inductive
TDF is an integrated theoretical framework composed of analysis of the interview responses following the Braun and
domains synthesized from 33 prior theories and 128 theoretical Clarke thematic approach [49].
constructs relevant to behavioral change [43]. It was developed
Recruitment
in collaboration with behavioral scientists and implementation
researchers to provide a comprehensive and holistic approach This study was conducted in collaboration with the cardiac unit
to identify determinants of behavior and potential targets for at Raigmore Hospital, a National Health Service (NHS) Trust
behavioral change. The TDF contains 14 domains covering 84 in the United Kingdom. A total of 19 participants (11 women)
constructs, examples of which include environmental context were recruited. All participants had had either a cardiac incident
and resources, emotion, goals and intentions, beliefs about or a cardiac disease in the past. All participants were offered a
capabilities, knowledge and skills, and social influences. A postsurgery cardiac rehabilitation program at the Raigmore
complete listing of the domains and the constructs related to Hospital [50]. The program consisted of a mix of education
each is available in Lou Atkins et al [43]. TDF was initially sessions and monitored exercises. To represent a range of views,
developed to identify influences on health professional behavior, we recruited patients who had attended some, but not all,
but has been extended to many areas in which changing behavior rehabilitation classes and others who had attended all classes
is important, including changing patient behavior [43]. It (Multimedia Appendix 1). The exclusion criteria were
supports the assessment of problems and identification of adolescents and people with severe cognitive impairment or
potential solutions by providing a lens to view the cognitive, terminal illness, as it was outside the scope of this study.
affective, social, and environmental influences on behavior. As Participants’ages ranged between 50 and 86 years, mean 70
a pragmatic framework, it signals opportunities and methods (SD 9).
for intervention by first identifying key domains and constructs
Procedure
and subsequently providing a guide to relevant explanations of
current behaviors [10]. This study was approved by the Health Research Authority,
NHS Research Scotland, and the Human Research Ethics
TDF has been widely used in health research, particularly for
Committee, University College Dublin. A total of 52 patients
qualitative approaches [44]. Examples of qualitative studies
were sent interview requests over post. Nineteen patients agreed
include using TDF to formulate interview questionnaires to
to participate in the study. The interviews were conducted
address target behavior [45,46], to analyze interview responses
separately over telephone calls and audio recorded. Each
to identify barriers and facilitators in implementing interventions
interview took approximately 45 minutes.
for families of people with schizophrenia [47], and increasing
physical activity in stroke survivors [48]. In applying TDF, we The interview questions were based on TDF and inquired about
aimed to identify key determinants of behavior in cardiac patients’experiences after cardiac surgery, focusing on domains
rehabilitation and self-management at the individual level. We of TDF related to knowledge and skills, individual goals and
also aimed to explore the key barriers and facilitators to intentions, social and environmental influences, and emotional
implementing technology-mediated cardiac rehabilitation and influence [43]. All TDF domains were examined, and only those
self-management solutions. In this paper, we use TDF in the relevant to the aims of this study were considered. This is
following ways: (1) as a basis for the interview questionnaire consistent with the guidelines for the use of TDF. Questions
to explore individual motivation and capability factors while about knowledge and skills inquired about their help seeking,
also covering the physical and environmental influences; (2) to new skills or techniques considered after cardiac events, sources
identify the relevant domains that are most likely to influence of information, and awareness of their cardiac condition. This
technology-mediated cardiac rehabilitation and self-management included, but was not limited to, awareness of support resources
and associated behaviors; and (3) to identify the key points such as mainstream self-care technologies and rehabilitation
during recuperation, rehabilitation, and self-management journey programs. Individual goals and intentions questions were about
when different domains exert a strong influence on peoples’ their experience of the rehabilitation program and its barriers
experiences and behaviors. The key advantage of TDF is that and facilitators, posthospitalization life goals and changes, and
it provides a pragmatic, yet rigorous, and holistic framework progress tracking. Questions about social and environmental
to address these issues. factors probed environmental and social sources of influence
and motivation, including the role of health experts and
technology on self-management postcardiac events. Questions
https://cardio.jmir.org/2021/2/e30428 JMIR Cardio 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e30428 | p. 4
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR CARDIO Tadas et al
about emotional influences focused on emotional reactions and this point, with a score across all codes of 0.53. Further
feelings of after cardiac events. discussion and refinement of codes took place to clarify and
agree with the final set of codes. On the basis of this final
The interview questions were structured according to each phase
codebook, the remaining transcripts were coded by the first
the participant went through after hospitalization (Figure 1).
author (ST). Following coding, themes were identified and again
The interview protocol was designed in collaboration with all
reviewed and defined through an iterative process of
the authors and is available in Multimedia Appendix 2. The
independent and group analysis involving all 3 authors.
interviews were conducted by the first author (ST), who has a
background in HCI and is an experienced qualitative researcher.
Results
The semistructured interview started with questions about the
participants’ first cardiac incident, including hospitalization,
Overview
initial awareness about the cardiac condition, and support
An analysis of interviews with participants about their
resources. This was followed by questions related to the
posthospitalization experiences identified a number of key
rehabilitation program experience, and then the self-management
themes. In Table 1, these themes are categorized into the three
experience.
key phases the patients went through after hospitalization,
Analysis namely, recuperation, rehabilitation, and self-management. As
Audio recordings of the interviews were transcribed verbatim. shown in Table 1, the findings are also classified in the context
The transcripts were analyzed using the NVivo 12 (QSR of the TDF domains. It is important to note that there is some
International) software and inductively coded using a thematic overlap in the themes identified in Table 1, with issues present
approach following the Braun and Clarke methodology [49]. A in more than 1 phase. Our analysis deliberately placed emphasis
codebook was created through an iterative process of coding on identifying the themes in each phase. This has resulted in
and clean coding. This was performed by dividing 30% of the more overall themes than might typically be the case in thematic
total interviews between the two authors. Coding was performed analysis. However, structuring our findings in this way has the
using an inductive approach. Conflicts were discussed and benefit of allowing us to identify the point when particular
resolved through discussions with a third researcher. After experiences first emerged, and when they were felt most
reaching a consensus on the codebook, three randomly selected strongly. In the Discussion section, we will reflect on how
interviews from the entire data set were coded. The Cohen κ specific needs (eg, a desire for normality) change over time and
coefficient was computed to assess the interrater reliability at the implications these changes have on the design of technology.
https://cardio.jmir.org/2021/2/e30428 JMIR Cardio 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e30428 | p. 5
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR CARDIO Tadas et al
Table 1. Mapping of posthospitalization transition phases, relevant Theoretical Domains Framework (TDF) domains, and themes from findings.
Transition and TDF domains Themes Codes
Recuperation phase
• Goals A desire for normality • Feeling better after cardiac event
• Rebuilding strength
• Desire for a normal life
• Knowledge Sources of information and role of official or • Initial help seeking
expert resources • Need for information
• Contact with health care professionals
• Resources recommended by experts
• Emotion Shock and gratitude • Gratitude or appreciation
• Emotional response or reaction
Rehabilitation classes phase
• Emotion Mindset and emotion • Stress or anxiety and relaxation
• Optimism • Positivity or negativity
• Fear
• Environmental context and resources Rehabilitation classes provide a safe space • Preference for local or in-person rehab
• Rehabilitation classes as a training place
• Classes as a safe zone
• Tailoring
• Barriers to local attendance
• Social influences Rehabilitation classes provide a social space • Rehabilitation classes as a social place
Self-management phase
• Environmental context and resources The importance of family and social support • Environmental or contextual support
• Social influences • Social support and types of social support
• Self-reliance
• Behavioral regulation Monitoring • Bodily awareness
• Monitoring
• Motivation or demotivation
• Beliefs about capability Capability • Emphasize what can be done
• Physical activity found in daily activity
I don’t have a condition as far as I am concerned. I
Recuperation Phase
had the operation repaired and I’ve never looked
Recuperation phase is the period immediately after discharge back.[P8]
from hospital following cardiac surgery.
Others spoke positively about their posthospitalization
Desire for Normality recuperation but described a more step-by-step, gradual process
of rebuilding strength. Every day, they would push themselves
The desire for a normal life (defined as the life patients had
to do more, but in small increments:
before cardiac surgery) was identified across each of the three
phases described in our results. However, this desire first Right enough, the next day I went out, I got a bit
emerged and was expressed most strongly during the further. The day after that, a bit further. That was
recuperation phase. While some patients experienced significant fine. So, I didn’t actually have any low points. I didn’t
physical and mental effects, other patients described feeling regress much at all. It was a fairly gradual and
better and healthier after surgery. Some went so far as to say continuous improvement.[P13]
procedures such as the insertion of stents had fixed them (ie,
Overall, participants expressed a strong desire to lead a normal
cured the cardiac problem) and given them confidence to return
lifeafter the cardiac event, without the need to be reminded of
to normal life:
their condition. Although hospitals provide a lot of information
Once the stents had been fitted, the pain had during discharge on potential risks and the importance of
disappeared, and I felt that the care that I was getting aftercare, many were more interested in knowing how and when
in hospital gave me the confidence to go ahead.[P19] they could return to their normal way of living:
https://cardio.jmir.org/2021/2/e30428 JMIR Cardio 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e30428 | p. 6
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR CARDIO Tadas et al
They had a lot of information on the aftercare In the initial stages of recuperation, the resources recommended
definitely, what we should do, but I was more by experts were highly valued, as patients trusted these
interested in would I return to my normal things resources. Participants were strongly of the view that there was
‘cause I’m a physical person. I’m a walker and I’m a need for access to and contact with experts and health
always very active and they encouraged me to carry professionals after discharge. Any type of contact with health
on just like that.[P3] professionals was found to be reassuring during the transition
I think we all change a wee bit but the whole point is, from hospital to self-care and recovery. Talks from experts in
is not to make a fuss about it, you have to try and get rehabilitation programs were considered valuable. However,
back in your routine again with your family as much this contact was sometimes restrained because of time
as possible and keep it as normal as possible.[P17] restrictions on health professionals. However, it is also due to
concerns on the part of patients that they might burden health
This desire was also expressed with regard to relationships.
professionals:
People wanted to be treated as normal by their friends and
family, that is, not being overcared for. They wanted to get on Maybe just more contact or freer to contact the
their feetand participate in family life in the same way they had cardiac advice line because, me personally, you tend
normally done before the incident: not to want to be contacting them unnecessarily but
sometimes just after in the first two or three
Just treating you I suppose how you were before the
months...It’s just that you feel that you weren’t
incident, if you know what I mean. You’re not any
encouraged to do it. No one said, “Just contact us if
different. Maybe my family is just like that. Once I
you’re concerned about anything.”[P3]
was up on my feet, that was it. Mum’s back, sort of
thing. I got away with making the Christmas dinner Participants’desire for information is consistent with the TDF
the first year ‘cause I was away at the hospital, but I Knowledgedomain. During the recuperation phase, participants
was back to it the next year. That did help because it had a need for general knowledge about cardiac conditions and
makes things seem normal. I’ve had this incident and rehabilitation procedures. They placed a strong emphasis on
I can just go on with the rest of the life. So that helped official knowledge sources. As will be seen in later sections,
me in that way.[P15] the types of knowledge participants prioritized evolved during
subsequent phases, with a greater emphasis on detailed
Viewed through TDF, returning to normal life can be seen as a
personalized understanding and informal information sources.
goal of our participants. It is likely to have a strong influence
on the participants’behavior. The fact that this goal is strongly Shock and Gratitude
linked to participants’sense of role and identity (eg, the family
Acute cardiac events are typically sudden, and unsurprisingly,
role) is likely to act as further reinforcement. However, the goal
trigger strong emotional responses. Some participants were
of returning to their life before surgery creates a potential
physically fit, had no other earlier health issues, no symptoms,
tension, as it may come into conflict with the lifestyle change
and no one in their family had had heart problems earlier.
goals recommended for rehabilitation and long-term health
However, suddenly, they experienced a life-threatening event,
management. Resolving this tension is therefore important for
were hospitalized, and underwent surgery. This was a significant
technology designs in this space.
shock. One participant described being so surprised that it took
Sources of Information and Role of Official or Expert him a few months to come to terms with the fact that he had
had a heart attack. Recovering from such incidents requires both
Resources
emotional and physical healing,
The patients stressed the need for information about their
condition. Increasing awareness and information is important It was a huge shock to have a heart attack, a real
for building confidence, “Having a heart attack was quite a shock to the system, and it just shows you how
shock to me and as I said I read as much as I could about it” vulnerable we are and I think that in itself was an
[P18]. incentive.[P18]
Following this initial shock, many patients described a newfound
There is a need for reliable information and a need to help
appreciation of life and did not want to take their health for
people retain this information. Those who had a family history
granted. They also expressed immense gratitude to and
or earlier awareness of cardiac symptoms were better prepared
appreciation of health care providers:
to handle the repercussions. When asked about how they sought
information initially, the most common response was from the I was aware that this is real, what happened to me,
internet and booklets given by their hospital. However, patients and you know, I used to think I was invincible. Well,
also expressed concerns about the credibility and possibility of I never really thought I was anything other than fit
harm in seeking information on the internet: and nothing would go wrong, but now I’m aware,
much more aware, that something could go wrong,
If I had a problem or if I wanted to find out anything
and I’m very grateful for what they did to me.[P16]
about health I will look it up on the computer.[P10]
TDF emphasizes the important role that emotion plays in driving
Googling too much messes with the head - panic due
behavior. Participants’sense of shock clearly shows how the
to sharp info content.[P4]
emotions experienced have the potential to drive emotional and
physical tension. Interestingly, while shock delayed some
https://cardio.jmir.org/2021/2/e30428 JMIR Cardio 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e30428 | p. 7
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR CARDIO Tadas et al
patients’ ability to move forward, in others, it helped raise emotions is clearly an important priority in enabling effective
awareness and acted as an incentive. In contrast, gratitude rehabilitation and self-management, but one that may be
always triggered strongly positive responses during the overlooked in some traditional rehabilitation programs. This
recuperation phase. emphasizes the importance of supporting both physical and
mental health during rehabilitation. Technologies that can
Rehabilitation Phase
provide emotional and mental support, along with reinforcement
All participants were offered a cardiac rehabilitation program of a positive mindset and self-reliance, have significant potential
after surgery at a hospital in the NHS Trust [50]. This section in this space.
discusses the participants’experiences of rehabilitation classes
Rehabilitation Classes Provide a Safe Space
and this phase more broadly.
Although participants identified barriers, they generally
Mindset and Emotions
expressed a strong preference for local and in-person
The patients’emotional responses developed and evolved during rehabilitation. Common barriers reported included
the rehabilitation phase. Although cardiac events brought out transportation, distance, schedule delays, low attendance, limited
both positive and negative emotions, many described how their expert availability, and logistic difficulties. Although the
mindset or outlook played a major role in recovery and preference for in-person rehabilitation is perhaps unsurprising
rehabilitation. Participants pointed out that their confidence, given the participants recruited, the reasons behind this
determination, and acceptance of their condition helped to preference point to important factors for technology design.
reduce the impact of the event on their life:
Rehabilitation classes provided support for training, giving
I’m generally quite a positive person and reasonably people the opportunity to gain information and practice physical
confident. I think not unnaturally confident, but if I exercises that they could continue during self-management.
understand a situation and I know about it and I know They liked the personal interaction with health professionals as
what to expect, then I’m fine with it.[P13] it gave them confidence and reassurance that they were doing
Participants realized the importance of reducing stress or anxiety things properly and progressing. Critically, rehabilitation classes
and noted the benefits of relaxation exercises, which were provided a controlled environment—a safe zone—while
introduced in the rehabilitation classes and were new to many, exercising and people felt that they could push themselves
“I really liked the relaxation type of stuff, I had never done that without the risk of overburdening their body. This safe zoning
in my life, never knew anything about that” [P13]. was important in helping participants overcome emotions such
as fear:
On the contrary, some participants emphasized that a lack of
attention to mental health support, after discharge from hospital I benefitted greatly from the program – the exercise
and in the rehabilitation program had an impact on their program. Principally because it was monitored
recovery. One patient was moved to look for private because if I get breathless now doing things, I don’t
psychological support outside the public NHS system, want to push it because I don’t know how serious that
would be, but in the classes when I got nearly
Half of the problem’s with my head to be quite honest
breathless, the physio really checked carefully and I
with you and if anything I feel that you get let down
felt perfectly relaxed. I knew that nothing untoward
a wee bit on the recovery part or the mental side of
would happen while I was in their care.[P9]
the trauma and I don’t feel there’s enough done in
The patients found that the tailored support focusing on
cardio rehab.[P4]
individual needs was encouraging. The rehabilitation program
Fear was a common emotion during rehabilitation. Some, for
was appreciated for treating every patient individually and
example, were apprehensive about pushing themselves to
helping set appropriate individual goals and where everybody
perform exercises as they were constantly afraid of harming
felt they were achieving something. This encouraged them to
themselves. Others expressed a general concern about an
continue their progress. However, some patients found the
uncertain future. Participants felt that this buildup of fear in
rehabilitation classes a bit slow and pointed out that the official
their minds hindered their progressive recovery and potential
self-management information resources received from the
for self-management:
hospital were generic. Patients wanted the rate of exercise, type
I didn’t sleep very well. In fact, I slept in a chair most of exercise, and information they received to be determined by
of the time. It was just apprehension, I suppose, their particular needs and how they progressed individually,
wondering if your life was going – I just thought it
My feeling is slightly that each person’s recovery is
was going to drastically change and I wasn’t going
very individual and not everybody would want to read
to be able to do anything, if you know what I mean.
through the British Heart Foundation.[P1]
I got over that, but it was always at the back of my
Importantly, rehabilitation classes also provided a structured
mind how much will I be able to do because I didn’t
approach, compartmentalized physical activity, and monitored
want to be having to just sit about all the time, but
to set time, separated from regular day-to-day activities. This
that wore off the better that I got. I did pick up quite
was key for some participants, as it supported a sense of
quickly.[P15]
normality outside of classes, by allowing for time-bound
The TDF domain Emotionincludes the constructs fear, anxiety,
positive/negative affect, and stress. Helping people address these
https://cardio.jmir.org/2021/2/e30428 JMIR Cardio 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e30428 | p. 8
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR CARDIO Tadas et al
engagement in physical activity and reserving a set time and off and maybe the grandchildren will come and you
place to completely focus on recovery. want to spend time with them and you think I will do
that later, the motivation isn’t there.[P19]
TDF emphasizes the behavioral impact of the environmental
context and resources. Our findings show that individual and Self-management Phase
tailored support, safe zoning, and structure or
Following the recuperation and rehabilitation class phase,
compartmentalization are important elements in the environment
participants moved to the self-management phase, requiring
provided by rehabilitation classes. Therefore, designs that
them to take greater responsibility to manage their own
leverage or recreate these environmental factors have significant
condition, without regular professional support.
potential.
Importance of Family and Social Support
Rehabilitation Classes Provide a Social Space
Social influence was again a key factor in the self-management
Together with the environmental benefits, rehabilitation classes
phase, but here the focus shifted toward preestablished and
were also a social place. This provided several clear benefits,
longer-term relationships. Family was a key enforcer in every
consistent with the TDF social influence domain. In particular,
phase, but became particularly important in the self-management
it provided a sense of community and gave people the
phase, with close partners particularly important. Family or
opportunity to talk to others in similar positions,
partners influenced patients’physical state by accompanying
I think when you are face-to-face with a group of them for fitness activities or caring for their diet. They
people who are recovering, the same way as you are, influenced their mental state by encouraging and caring, or just
I think you encourage each other and I think also the being normal:
information that you receive collectively adds force
My wife is very encouraging of me to do healthy
to the information that you are given.[P18]
things. She leaves it to me, but she’s very positive
In contrast to formal information provided by health about it, very helpful. She doesn’t badger me at all,
professionals during the recuperation phase, information at this but she encourages me. I think that’s important. If
point also came in the form of shared experiences. Although there is someone close to you who cheers your goals
this information is less formal, it is also more personal and has and wants you to do well in those goals. I think that
collective power. Patients discussed their direct experiences of makes a huge difference.[P13]
dealing with various aspects of the recovery process and
Other social support included friends, common interest groups,
reassured each other:
or web-based support groups. Web-based support groups,
One other big advantage was being able to talk to although not described favorably by many participants, enabled
other people who were in a similar position. That was continuity of communication and mutual support for people
really useful, and I think we could reassure each who may be living in remote areas or are unable to get together
other, and we could talk to each other about how we with others:
dealt with various aspects of the recovery process.
Interacting with people is much more important
That was a very valuable part of it.[P13]
because it’s social. It prevents depression. I could
A contrast was observed in the case of normality. In the quite see how you come home from hospital, you’re
recuperation phase, normality was associated with life before living on your own, I’m frightened.[P2]
cardiac surgery. The social aspect of rehabilitation classes had
Participants also described the influence of environmental or
the potential to help participants normalize their new
contextual factors, such as the home, workplace, and
experiences, which in turn helped them adjust to a changing
surroundings on recovery and self-management. Stress at home
life after hospitalization,
and workplace causes anxiety, which could have detrimental
The classes were good, mainly the fact that we were effects. Most patients found scenic surroundings and nature
talking to people who had gone through the same walks beneficial:
problem, and come out the other end, and we were
I’m very lucky. We live in the country, we own our
getting the feedback from them, making us feel, well,
own house, I have a most amazing view from where
they’ve been through it, they’re looking well, so
I’m sitting talking to you just now, and I don’t have
maybe we can do the same.[P11]
pressures that a lot of people will have.[P2]
Finally, the social nature of the rehabilitation classes was a clear
Although many participants valued social support, some patients
source of motivation. Many participants had experienced
preferred to be self-reliant, not liking to be told what to do, and
technology as solitaryand not something that was shared with
wanting to be in control of their lives. Some did not want to be
other people. Many were reluctant to replace human contact
a burden on their family and would not bother their general
with technology. Human touchwas considered very important,
practitioners unless absolutely necessary. However, 2 patients
whereas technology was considered optional or supplementary,
stressed that they did not need any type of help or support, as
The motivation is to meet with people and you all join they considered themselves to be self-sufficient:
in and that’s the motivation I think and you would
I’m fortunate that I’ve not got people around at all
find time to go to a class, whereas if you were busy
to assist me or help me in any way and that I maintain
during the day doing other things, you sort of put it
is a great, because I strive to do these things.[P9]
https://cardio.jmir.org/2021/2/e30428 JMIR Cardio 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e30428 | p. 9
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR CARDIO Tadas et al
I’ve lived on my own for most of my life and I’m very that are largely focused on irregular events, it may be possible
sort of self-sufficient I suppose, in a way.[P7] to develop systems that provide a safe zoning effect similar to
In the self-management phase, there is a clear overlap between that identified in face-to-face classes in the rehabilitation phase.
the TDF domains, social influences, and environmental context To achieve this monitored safe zone, it is critical that people
and resources. This is unsurprising given the interconnected trust the privacy of monitoring technologies. Some participants
nature of home, work, and social or family lives in the questioned the integrity and transparency of technologies and
day-to-day lives of many people. Leveraging technology to were unsure if web-based resources could be trusted.
provide increased opportunities for family involvement has Surprisingly, others also questioned their own potential honesty
clear potential and has been widely explored in other areas of when entering their own information to seek help through digital
health-focused research. Maintaining a balance between people’s apps:
desire to be self-reliant and their desire to be connected is also You can put into a computer whatever you like. You
critical in designing such technology. can say I’m a 6-foot leggy blonde, how do you advise
me to get better, but you can type anything in. You’re
Monitoring
not going to have to be honest into a computer but
Many participants described becoming more aware of their
face-to-face...[P2]
body, the link between their mind and body, and listened to
their body more after cardiac events. As described above, Capability
rehabilitation classes provided a safe zone. Monitoring was a One of the most interesting recommendations made by the
key part of this, with close overall monitoring by health participants was that technology should act as an empowering
professionals and regular pulse and blood pressure monitoring. agent. In particular, it should focus on what can be done, rather
During the self-management phase, self-monitoring in daily life than identifying or tracking limitations. Patients believed that
was common and again gave many patients confidence to technology should guide them by allowing them to see what
continue with physical activities and push themselves. The most kind and how much exercise they could perform. In this way,
commonly monitored measurements reported by participants technology would more closely mirror the guidance provided
were heart rate, blood pressure, steps, sleep, and medication. by health professionals in rehabilitation classes,
Among these steps was the most frequently monitored unit.
Fitbit (FitBit Inc) is the most widely used and well-known If there was any kind of technology or anything that
monitoring technology among participants. All patients who would say to them you could actually do this after so
owned a Fitbit started using it after hospitalization. This was many weeks, with care, I think so because all you get
mainly for self-motivation and safety, and to obtain other useful told, ‘Don’t do this’, and then you’re sitting there and
insights about their body. Monitoring was also done to share you think, oh, and everything just seizes up and your
information with the general practitioners, confidence does go, to be honest with you.[P15]
Respect for people’s autonomy was also important, with 1
I probably wouldn’t push myself to do things, whereas
participant negatively describing technology as assertive. To
now, with the Fitbit, I try where possible to be able
be successful, it was essential that technology respected peoples’
to fulfil my steps every day.[P18]
autonomy:
TDF describes the behavioral regulation domain as anything
aimed at managing or changing objectively observed or That you’re always in control of them. What they’re
measured actions. Self-monitoring is an important component providing you with is information and suggestions
of this domain. This quote shows how some participants used rather than commands.[P13]
monitoring technologies for behavioral regulation during the It was found that patients accomplished physical activity through
self-management phase. Monitoring also helped to provide activities in daily life. The preferred type of physical activity
ongoing insight and more personalized knowledge about their for most patients was walking and gardening. Their occupation
own body. However, continuous monitoring could also cause and where they lived reflected on the type of physical activity
stress, and some patients liked monitoring only when they were they preferred:
performing physical activity. Warnings were seen as valuable,
My husband’s a farmer. We live on a farm. We have
but only where something specific and unusual was detected,
no problem with exercise at all.[P2]
and not in a more routine or general way that highlights
limitations: As discussed above, self-monitoring is an important construct
within the TDF behavioral regulation domain. Habit is an
That could actually cause more of a kind of worrying important construct in this domain. Alongside encouraging
aspect to people, it could lead to more stress, having targeted lifestyle changes, our data suggest that long-term
to do that and to also find if their heart rate wasn’t rehabilitation technology will be most effective if it draws on
good, it would be more of a worry to them.[P19] previously established healthy habits and activities of daily life.
It would be useful if...it could issue a warning if This can be combined with recommendations that emphasize
something irregular began to happen.[P13] capability and reinforce positive opportunities, allowing
This perspective suggests that for some people, long-term designers to build on the empowerment construct, which is
monitoring will work best when it is structured or emphasized in the TDF’s Belief about Capabilitydomain. This
compartmentalized. By combining this approach with warnings
https://cardio.jmir.org/2021/2/e30428 JMIR Cardio 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e30428 | p. 10
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR CARDIO Tadas et al
overall approach is complementary to participants’desire for a health behavioral change, both in the cardiac domain and
normal life and should thus be a key focus for designers. beyond. Critically, however, the use of TDF has also allowed
us to see how factors that influence behavior evolve over time
Discussion and identify potential sources of tension. For example,
participants experienced a strong initial need for formal
Principal Findings knowledge and access to health experts. This subsequently
As described in the Related Work section, TDF is a synthesis shifted to a desire for detailed personal insight and shared peer
of previous theories of behavioral change. Mapping the themes knowledge. We also see how participants experienced a strong
to the TDF domains provided us with key domains and desire for a normal life after surgery and how a redefinition of
behavioral constructs to consider in each phase after the cardiac normality is important in long-term recovery. In this section,
event. The key strength of TDF is that it provides a rigorous we discuss our findings, focusing on five key issues, namely,
and holistic framework for identifying a wide range of factors extended normality, safe zoning, focus on capability, different
that impact behavior. Unsurprisingly, this has resulted in types of knowledge, and emotional support. Figure 2provides
individual findings that are consistent with earlier research on an overview of the key points and recommendations addressed
in the Discussion.
Figure 2. Key patient experiences and areas where technology can provide support during recuperation, rehabilitation, and self-management.
experiences with other cardiac patients. In the self-management
Extended Normality
phase, the participants who were most successful in sustaining
Existing literature has described the mundane nature of healthy behavior were those who integrated their health
day-to-day self-care [17] and the degree to which people prefer management with their preferred activities of daily life, such as
not to be reminded of chronic health conditions [28]. We also walking or gardening. This helped them reclaim a sense of their
find that a desire for normality is a strong motivating factor; old routine, independence, and normal life. Viewed through
indeed, it is a stated goal for many people after cardiac surgery. TDF, this also engages with the importance of self-identification
This creates an obvious source of tension, as lifestyle change in either hindering or supporting healthy behavior. The study
is an important part of cardiac rehabilitation and is critical to of stroke survivors by Ploderer et al [15] also highlighted the
long-term health. Given participants’strength of feelings, it is people’s efforts to manage the illness as well as everyday life
unlikely that behavioral change strategies that run counter to activities and to reconstruct their identities.
the goal of normality will be successful. Interestingly, our
This has led to several recommendations for technology.
findings show how some participants’conceptions of normality
Critically, technologies should recognize that exceptional goals
evolved over time and suggest ways to address this challenge.
and external incentives may not be necessary. Normal life is a
We call this extended normality.
goal and incentive in and of itself. Care should also be taken to
During the recuperation phase, normality is defined as a return resolve the potential conflict that might arise between
to the life participants lived before their acute cardiac event. participants’goal for normality and the lifestyle change goals
Official knowledge sources and contact with experts provided recommended by professionals for rehabilitation and long-term
information on the recommended changes. However, in health management. Personalized rehabilitation programs that
rehabilitation classes, participants also began to normalize their respect personal autonomy and provide tailored
new experiences through social interaction and by sharing recommendations linked to daily life can help address this
https://cardio.jmir.org/2021/2/e30428 JMIR Cardio 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e30428 | p. 11
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR CARDIO Tadas et al
tension. As people transition to life after surgery, technology in the cardiac space will benefit from building on this earlier
that supports enhanced contact with peers and shared stories work.
can also help develop a new sense of normality.
Safe Zoning
Types of Knowledge
During the rehabilitation phase, participants liked the controlled
A previous study by Pollack et al [5] provided a detailed environment, intensive monitoring, and detailed personalized
exploration of the experience of patients discharged from the support provided by health professionals. It provided insight
hospital. They describe how people are often unprepared for a about their current health status and increased confidence by
transition from the hospital and identified three important assuring them that they were within a safe zone of physical
challenges for patients recovering from illness and needed to activity. This safe zoninghelped participants overcome emotions
engage in successful self-management: (1) lack of support for such as fear. Critically, it did not provide safety by reducing
health knowledge, (2) no opportunity to access resources, and the activity. Rather, it provided a space where people could
(3) no opportunities to promote self-efficacy. We discuss push themselves without the fear of overburdening their body.
self-efficacy in greater detail in the section focusing on
Technology that supports this safe zoning on an ongoing basis
capability below. Here, we consider knowledge and access. Our
is likely to be highly valuable. Importantly, safe zoning should
findings again show that people’s knowledge needs changed
consider not only physical, but also emotional safe zones. During
over time.
the self-management phase, self-monitoring gave some patients
During the recuperation phase, people place a high value on confidence to continue physical activities and push themselves.
formal knowledge, by which we mean information provided by However, many patients also did not want to be monitored
health professionals and official sources. Much of this was continuously, as this could cause anxiety and interfere with their
standardized information about cardiac rehabilitation and desire for normality. This finding is consistent with previous
lifestyle management, including standardized official booklets. findings of Maitland et al [28] that cardiovascular patients were
Participants also sought web-based information but were often reluctant to accept unnecessary monitoring. Warnings were also
mistrusting of such sources. During the rehabilitation phase, a considered valuable only when something unusual was detected
change occurred in the information that participants valued. and not in a more routine or general way. A structured or
Formal knowledge remained important, but participants no compartmentalized monitoring approach with warnings largely
longer wanted generic information. They placed a high value focused on irregular events may help to provide a safe zone
on both shared experiential knowledge and detailed personal effect similar to face-to-face rehabilitation classes. Transparency
insight. Shared experience was facilitated through contact with and trust in the privacy of monitoring technologies are critical
peers in rehabilitation classes and occasionally through for achieving this goal.
web-based support groups. As noted above, it played an
Emotional Support
important role in normalizing people’s new experiences.
Personal knowledge was initially facilitated through the tailored Acute cardiac events affect people both physically and mentally.
support provided by health professionals in classes and later, In recent decades, health research has increasingly recognized
although typically to a lesser degree, through self-monitoring and addressed the interrelated nature of physical and mental
technology. health. For example, the recognition of psycho-oncology is a
key element in rehabilitation for cancer survivors [54,55].
Our findings regarding types of knowledge are consistent with
a recent systematic review of barriers and facilitators of As participants transitioned from recuperation to the
technology for cardiac rehabilitation and self-management. It rehabilitation phase, their emotions transitioned from shock and
also emphasized the need for technology designers to support gratitude to long-term emotions. Multiple emotions built up and
background knowledge as well as personal and in-the-moment left unchecked can affect a person’s mental health, inducing
knowledge, where background knowledge is awareness of their fear, anxiety, negativity, and loss of confidence. Many patients
medical conditions, medication, posthospital care measures, have stressed the importance of emotional support. Family and
and available support systems; and in-the-moment knowledge close friends are often vital sources of emotional support.
is awareness of current body condition and changes in their Participants pointed out that although a lot was done to educate
body [11]. and motivate them on physical exercise and diet, less attention
was given to emotional strength. Although in-person emotional
Moving forward, technologies that support different types of
or mental support is preferred, there is increasing evidence in
knowledge have significant potential. However, it was striking
recent years that technology can play a significant role in
that many of our participants expressed the view that technology
providing support for mental health [56]. Examples range from
is a solitary thing. Within the HCI field, significant research
systems specifically designed to integrate with traditional care
has been conducted on the design of technologies that support
[57] to the more exploratory use of voice interfaces and chatbots
social connectedness in health [51], and in personal and lived
using artificial intelligence to provide emotional support [58].
informatics [52] and the use of technology to support informal
Importantly, alongside negative emotional experiences,
caregiving [53]. We do not have the scope to elaborate on this
participants also expressed positive emotions such as gratitude
work at this point, except to state that the development of
and renewed appreciation of the natural world. Many also
effective social networks in self-monitoring technologies in the
described the beneficial impact of a positive mindset and an
health domain is clearly not a trivial task. However, research
increased sense of the link between mind and body, including
https://cardio.jmir.org/2021/2/e30428 JMIR Cardio 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e30428 | p. 12
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR CARDIO Tadas et al
an appreciation of the stress reduction in rehabilitation classes. will provide a broader view of the impact technology in support
This suggests significant potential in the application of positive rehabilitation and self-care. Similarly, including health care
computing approaches [59] that emphasize human potential and professionals in the design process will also be crucial to the
reinforce emotions such as kindness and gratitude. Approaches development of technologies that are acceptable and effective
such as computer-supported mindfulness also have significant in improving the rehabilitation and self-management practices
potential to support stress reduction and enhance the sense of of patients. This work is beyond the scope of this study. Our
a positive mind-body link [60]. future studies will involve both patients and health professionals
and will apply co-design methods to implement systems that
Focus on Capability
operationalize and evaluate the recommendations provided in
Building on the value of positive computing approaches, this this paper.
study strongly suggests that designers should focus on capability
Future Work
rather than limitations. Particularly in the self-management
phase, our participants expressed a strong desire for technology The Discussion section has identified a number of important
that could recognize renewed strength and make positive avenues for research on the design of technology to support
recommendations. They wanted technology to show what is cardiovascular rehabilitation and self-management. Continuing
possible by tailoring to their capabilities rather than focusing to address the theoretical basis for this research will be a key
on limitations. They also wanted technology that respected their focus of our work. As described in the related work section,
autonomy, placed them in control, and offered suggestions rather TDF is an integrated theoretical framework composed of
than being directive. Interestingly, some participants placed a domains synthesized from theories and theoretical constructs
significant value on self-sufficiency. They did not like to be relevant to behavioral change. Building on TDF, researchers in
helped by their families or friends. It is possible that people in behavior change have also developed the behavior change wheel
this group would also consider technology as encroaching on (BCW) [43,44]. This supports intervention designers in selecting
their preference for self-sufficiency. However, we consider it intervention and behavioral change techniques by mapping the
more likely that autonomy-respecting and capability-focused TDF domains to the BCW. BCW is based on three components,
systems will have a significant potential with this group. This namely, capability, opportunity, and motivation (the COM-B
analysis resonates with the conclusions of Andersen et al [20], model). It presents human behavior (B) as resulting from the
where reintroducing patients as active diagnostic agents in the interaction between physical and psychological capabilities (C),
telemonitoring system showed patient willingness to take on opportunities provided by the physical and social environment
the added workload and become actively engaged in their (O), and reflective and automatic motivation (M) [63,64]. For
monitoring and diagnosis. example, TDF domains linked to capability (C) are knowledge,
skills, memory, and behavioral regulation. BCW proposes the
Through the growing capabilities of recommendation system
following interventions to address factors related to capability:
techniques, we envision technology to be key in enabling
education, training, and enablement. In this way, BCW proposes
personalized rehabilitation and self-care by focusing on
interventions and policies for each of the three components.
individual capabilities. Tailoring recommendations for daily
Building on the identification of important TDF domains and
activities will be important in achieving this. Apps should also
constructs in this study, application of BCW is a key priority
take into account the effect of progress awareness, wherein
in our future research.
tailored programs based on step-by-step progress and
presentation of the progress would contribute toward motivation. Conclusions
Previous HCI literature on person-centered recommender
This paper has applied the TDF to explore the experiences of
systems by researchers such as Konrad et al [61] and Hollis et
people with CVD, focusing specifically on recuperation,
al [62] offers valuable guidance in this area.
rehabilitation, and self-management phases after an acute cardiac
Limitations event. Through these three phases, we have described how
factors such as desire for normality, types of knowledge, safe
Although we interviewed a relatively diverse group of people
zoning, connectedness, and capability impact patients. We then
with cardiac problems, including people who both withdrew
highlight the TDF domains that are linked to the factors arising
from and attended a full rehabilitation program, it will be
in the three phases. Building on our findings, we have provided
beneficial if future studies include more people aged less than
implications of these factors and the TDF domains in the design
55 years and more people from urban areas. Although our
of technology-mediated cardiac rehabilitation and
findings are directed toward supporting patients, we understand
self-management.
that the opinions of caregivers are crucial and involving them
Acknowledgments
This project is supported by the European Union’s INTERREG VA Program, managed by the Special European Union Programmes
Body.
Conflicts of Interest
None declared.
https://cardio.jmir.org/2021/2/e30428 JMIR Cardio 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e30428 | p. 13
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR CARDIO Tadas et al
Multimedia Appendix 1
Demographic information about the participants.
[DOCX File , 15 KB-Multimedia Appendix 1]
Multimedia Appendix 2
Interview guide.
[DOCX File , 20 KB-Multimedia Appendix 2]
References
1. Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs). World Health Organization. URL: https://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/
cardiovascular-diseases-(cvds)[accessed 2021-09-17]
2. Cardiovascular disease. National Health Service. URL: https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/cardiovascular-disease/[accessed
2020-05-11]
3. Cardiac rehabilitation. British Heart Foundation. URL: https://www.bhf.org.uk/informationsupport/support/practical-support/
cardiac-rehabilitation[accessed 2020-05-11]
4. Barlow J, Wright C, Sheasby J, Turner A, Hainsworth J. Self-management approaches for people with chronic conditions:
a review. Patient Educ Couns 2002;48(2):177-187. [doi: 10.1016/s0738-3991(02)00032-0] [Medline: 12401421]
5. Pollack AH, Backonja U, Miller AD, Mishra SR, Khelifi M, Kendall L, et al. Closing the gap: supporting patients' transition
to self-management after hospitalization. In: Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 2016 Presented at: CHI'16: CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems; May 7 - 12, 2016; San
Jose California USA p. 5324-5336. [doi: 10.1145/2858036.2858240]
6. Serlachius A, Sutton S. Self-management and behaviour change: theoretical models. In: Newman S, Steed E, Mulligan K,
editors. Chronic Physical Illness: Self-management and Behavioural Interventions. Maidenhead, Berkshire, United Kingdom:
Open University Press - McGraw-Hill; 2009:47-63.
7. Yohannes AM, Doherty P, Bundy C, Yalfani A. The long-term benefits of cardiac rehabilitation on depression, anxiety,
physical activity and quality of life. J Clin Nurs 2010 Oct;19(19-20):2806-2813. [doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2702.2010.03313.x]
[Medline: 20738450]
8. Daly J, Sindone AP, Thompson DR, Hancock K, Chang E, Davidson P. Barriers to participation in and adherence to cardiac
rehabilitation programs: a critical literature review. Prog Cardiovasc Nurs 2002;17(1):8-17. [doi:
10.1111/j.0889-7204.2002.00614.x] [Medline: 11872976]
9. Gallagher R, Roach K, Sadler L, Glinatsis H, Belshaw J, Kirkness A, et al. Mobile technology use across age groups in
patients eligible for cardiac rehabilitation: survey study. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2017 Oct 24;5(10):e161 [FREE Full text]
[doi: 10.2196/mhealth.8352] [Medline: 29066425]
10. Susan M, Marie J, Jill F, Wendy H, Martin E. From theory to intervention: mapping theoretically derived behavioural
determinants to behaviour change techniques. Appl Psychol 2008 Jul 08;57(4):660-680 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1111/j.1464-0597.2008.00341.x]
11. Tadas S, Coyle D. Barriers to and facilitators of technology in cardiac rehabilitation and self-management: systematic
qualitative grounded theory review. J Med Internet Res 2020 Nov 11;22(11):e18025 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/18025]
[Medline: 33174847]
12. Siegers K, Van Mechelen M, Vanattenhoven J. Mapping the health technology needs of congestive heart failure patients:
user needs vs. feasibility. In: Proceedings of the 11th EAI International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies
for Healthcare. 2017 Presented at: PervasiveHealth '17: 11th EAI International Conference on Pervasive Computing
Technologies for Healthcare; May 23 - 26, 2017; Barcelona Spain p. 266-271. [doi: 10.1145/3154862.3154916]
13. Antypas K, Wangberg SC. Combining users' needs with health behavior models in designing an internet- and mobile-based
intervention for physical activity in cardiac rehabilitation. JMIR Res Protoc 2014 Jan 10;3(1):e4 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.2196/resprot.2725] [Medline: 24413185]
14. Sankaran S, Frederix I, Haesen M, Dendale P, Luyten K, Coninx K. A grounded approach for applying behavior change
techniques in mobile cardiac tele-rehabilitation. In: Proceedings of the 9th ACM International Conference on PErvasive
Technologies Related to Assistive Environments. 2016 Presented at: PETRA '16: 9th ACM International Conference on
PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments; June 29 - July 1, 2016; Corfu Island Greece p. 1-8. [doi:
10.1145/2910674.2910680]
15. Ploderer B, Stuart J, Tran V, Green T, Muller J. The transition of stroke survivors from hospital to home: understanding
work and design opportunities. In: Proceedings of the 29th Australian Conference on Computer-Human Interaction. 2017
Presented at: OzCHI '17: 29th Australian Conference on Human-Computer Interaction; November 28 - December 1, 2017;
Brisbane Queensland Australia p. 1-9. [doi: 10.1145/3152771.3152772]
16. Doyle J, Murphy E, Kuiper J, Smith S, Hannigan C, Jacobs A, et al. Managing multimorbidity: identifying design requirements
for a digital self-management tool to support older adults with multiple chronic conditions. In: Proceedings of the 2019
https://cardio.jmir.org/2021/2/e30428 JMIR Cardio 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e30428 | p. 14
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR CARDIO Tadas et al
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2019 Presented at: CHI '19: CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems; May 4 - 9, 2019; Glasgow Scotland UK p. 1-14. [doi: 10.1145/3290605.3300629]
17. Nunes F, Verdezoto N, Fitzpatrick G, Kyng M, Grönvall E, Storni C. Self-care technologies in HCI. ACM Trans Comput
Hum Interact 2015 Dec 14;22(6):1-45 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1145/2803173]
18. Athilingam P, Jenkins B. Mobile phone apps to support heart failure self-care management: integrative review. JMIR Cardio
2018 May 02;2(1):e10057 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/10057] [Medline: 31758762]
19. Andersen TO, Bansler JP, Kensing F, Moll J, Mønsted T, Nielsen KD, et al. Aligning concerns in telecare: three concepts
to guide the design of patient-centred e-health. Comput Supported Coop Work 2018 May 19;27(3-6):1039-1079 [FREE
Full text] [doi: 10.1007/s10606-018-9309-1]
20. Andersen T, Bjørn P, Kensing F, Moll J. Designing for collaborative interpretation in telemonitoring: re-introducing patients
as diagnostic agents. Int J Med Inform 2011 Aug;80(8):112-126. [doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2010.09.010] [Medline: 21067968]
21. Wottrich AW, Aström K, Löfgren M. On parallel tracks: newly home from hospital--people with stroke describe their
expectations. Disabil Rehabil 2012;34(14):1218-1224. [doi: 10.3109/09638288.2011.640381] [Medline: 22200192]
22. O'Shea O, Woods C, McDermott L, Buys R, Cornelis N, Claes J, et al. A qualitative exploration of cardiovascular disease
patients' views and experiences with an eHealth cardiac rehabilitation intervention: The PATHway Project. PLoS One 2020
Jul 06;15(7):e0235274 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0235274] [Medline: 32628688]
23. Geurts E, Hansen D, Dendale P, Coninx K. Impact of a mobile cycling application on cardiac patients’cycling behavior
and enjoyment. In: Proceedings of the 11th PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments Conference. 2018
Presented at: PETRA '18: The 11th PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments Conference; June 26 - 29,
2018; Corfu Greece p. 257-264. [doi: 10.1145/3197768.3197783]
24. Beatty AL, Magnusson SL, Fortney JC, Sayre GG, Whooley MA. VA fitheart, a mobile app for cardiac rehabilitation:
usability study. JMIR Hum Factors 2018 Jan 15;5(1):e3 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/humanfactors.8017] [Medline:
29335235]
25. Aarhus R, Ballegaard SA. Negotiating boundaries: managing disease at home. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2010 Presented at: CHI '10: CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems; April 10 - 15, 2010; Atlanta Georgia USA p. 1223-1232. [doi: 10.1145/1753326.1753509]
26. Geurts E, Haesen M, Dendale P, Luyten K, Coninx K. Back on bike: the BoB mobile cycling app for secondary prevention
in cardiac patients. In: Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile
Devices and Services. 2016 Presented at: MobileHCI '16: 18th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction
with Mobile Devices and Services; September 6 - 9, 2016; Florence Italy p. 135-146. [doi: 10.1145/2935334.2935377]
27. Grönvall E, Verdezoto N. Beyond self-monitoring: understanding non-functional aspects of home-based healthcare
technology. In: Proceedings of the 2013 ACM international joint conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous computing. 2013
Presented at: UbiComp '13: The 2013 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing;
September 8 - 12, 2013; Zurich Switzerland p. 587-596. [doi: 10.1145/2493432.2493495]
28. Maitland J, Chalmers M. Self-monitoring, self-awareness, and self-determination in cardiac rehabilitation. In: Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2010 Presented at: CHI '10: CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems; April 10 - 15, 2010; Atlanta Georgia USA p. 1213-1222. [doi:
10.1145/1753326.1753508]
29. Preuveneers D, Berbers Y. Mobile phones assisting with health self-care: a diabetes case study. In: Proceedings of the 10th
international conference on Human computer interaction with mobile devices and services. 2008 Presented at: MobileHCI08:
10th International Conference on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services; September 2 - 5, 2008;
Amsterdam The Netherlands p. 177-186. [doi: 10.1145/1409240.1409260]
30. Raj S, Toporski K, Garrity A, Lee JM, Newman MW. "My blood sugar is higher on the weekends": finding a role for
context and context-awareness in the design of health self-management technology. In: Proceedings of the 2019 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2019 Presented at: CHI '19: CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems; May 4 - 9, 2019; Glasgow Scotland UK p. 1-13. [doi: 10.1145/3290605.3300349]
31. Nunes F. From medicalized to mundane self-care technologies. interactions 2019 Apr 23;26(3):67-69. [doi: 10.1145/3319374]
32. Banerjee S. Multimorbidity--older adults need health care that can count past one. Lancet 2015 Feb 14;385(9968):587-589.
[doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61596-8] [Medline: 25468155]
33. Emma M, Julie D, Caoimhe H, Suzanne S, Janneke K, An J, et al. Perceptions and use of technology to support older adults
with multimorbidity. Stud Health Technol Inform 2017;242:160-167 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.5334/ijic.3521] [Medline:
28873794]
34. Spina G, Huang G, Vaes A, Spruit M, Amft O. COPDTrainer: a smartphone-based motion rehabilitation training system
with real-time acoustic feedback. In: Proceedings of the 2013 ACM international joint conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous
computing. 2013 Presented at: UbiComp '13: The 2013 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous
Computing; September 8 - 12, 2013; Zurich Switzerland p. 597-606. [doi: 10.1145/2493432.2493454]
35. Taylor A, Godden D, Aitken A, Colligan J, Wilson R. Delivering group-based services to the home via the internet:
maximising clinical and social benefits. In: Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Pervasive Computing
Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth) and Workshops.: IEEE; 2011 Presented at: 5th International Conference
https://cardio.jmir.org/2021/2/e30428 JMIR Cardio 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e30428 | p. 15
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR CARDIO Tadas et al
on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth) and Workshops; May23-26, 2011; Dublin, Ireland.
[doi: 10.4108/icst.pervasivehealth.2011.246004]
36. Hekler EB, Klasnja P, Froehlich JE, Buman MP. Mind the theoretical gap: interpreting, using, and developing behavioral
theory in HCI research. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2013 Presented
at: CHI '13: CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems; April 27 - May 2, 2013; Paris France p. 3307-3316.
[doi: 10.1145/2470654.2466452]
37. Klasnja P, Consolvo S, Pratt W. How to evaluate technologies for health behavior change in HCI research. In: Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2011 Presented at: CHI '11: CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems; May 7 - 12, 2011; Vancouver BC Canada p. 3063-3072. [doi:
10.1145/1978942.1979396]
38. O'Leary K, Eschler J, Kendall L, Vizer L, Ralston J, Pratt W. Understanding design tradeoffs for health technologies: a
mixed-methods approach. In: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
2015 Presented at: CHI '15: CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems; April 18 - 23, 2015; Seoul Republic
of Korea p. 4151-4160. [doi: 10.1145/2702123.2702576]
39. McDermott MS, While AE. Maximizing the healthcare environment: a systematic review exploring the potential of computer
technology to promote self-management of chronic illness in healthcare settings. Patient Educ Couns 2013 Jul;92(1):13-22.
[doi: 10.1016/j.pec.2013.02.014] [Medline: 23566427]
40. Charles AS. The health belief model. In: Cambridge Handbook of Psychology, Health and Medicine, Second Edition.
Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press; 2014:97-102.
41. Madden TJ, Ellen PS, Ajzen I. A comparison of the theory of planned behavior and the theory of reasoned action. Pers Soc
Psychol Bull 2016 Jul 02;18(1):3-9 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1177/0146167292181001]
42. Bandura A. Social cognitive theory of self-regulation. Organ Behav Hum Decis Process 1991 Dec;50(2):248-287 [FREE
Full text] [doi: 10.1016/0749-5978(91)90022-l]
43. Atkins L, Francis J, Islam R, O'Connor D, Patey A, Ivers N, et al. A guide to using the theoretical domains framework of
behaviour change to investigate implementation problems. Implement Sci 2017 Jun 21;12(1):77 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1186/s13012-017-0605-9] [Medline: 28637486]
44. Cane J, O'Connor D, Michie S. Validation of the theoretical domains framework for use in behaviour change and
implementation research. Implement Sci 2012 Apr 24;7:37 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/1748-5908-7-37] [Medline:
22530986]
45. Taylor N, Lawton R, Conner M. Development and initial validation of the determinants of physical activity questionnaire.
Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act 2013 Jun 11;10:74 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/1479-5868-10-74] [Medline: 23758912]
46. Taylor N, Parveen S, Robins V, Slater B, Lawton R. Development and initial validation of the influences on patient safety
behaviours questionnaire. Implement Sci 2013 Jul 29;8:81 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/1748-5908-8-81] [Medline:
23895628]
47. Michie S, Pilling S, Garety P, Whitty P, Eccles MP, Johnston MA, et al. Difficulties implementing a mental health guideline:
an exploratory investigation using psychological theory. Implement Sci 2007 Mar 26;2:8 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1186/1748-5908-2-8] [Medline: 17386102]
48. Nicholson SL, Donaghy M, Johnston M, Sniehotta FF, van Wijck F, Johnston D, et al. A qualitative theory guided analysis
of stroke survivors' perceived barriers and facilitators to physical activity. Disabil Rehabil 2014;36(22):1857-1868. [doi:
10.3109/09638288.2013.874506] [Medline: 24377329]
49. Braun V, Clarke V. Successful Qualitative Research: A Practical Guide for Beginners. UK: SAGE Publications; 2013.
50. Foster EJ, Munoz SA, Crabtree D, Leslie SJ, Gorely T. Barriers and facilitators to participating in cardiac rehabilitation
and physical activity in a remote and rural population: a cross-sectional survey. Cardiol J 2021;28(5):697-706 [FREE Full
text] [doi: 10.5603/CJ.a2019.0091] [Medline: 31565795]
51. Peters D, Calvo RA, Ryan RM. Designing for motivation, engagement and wellbeing in digital experience. Front Psychol
2018 May 28;9:797 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00797] [Medline: 29892246]
52. Rooksby J, Rost M, Morrison A, Chalmers M. Personal tracking as lived informatics. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2014 Presented at: CHI '14: CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems; April 26 - May 1, 2014; Toronto Ontario Canada p. 1163-1172. [doi: 10.1145/2556288.2557039]
53. Güldenpfennig F, Nunes F, Fitzpatrick G. Proxycare: integrating informal care into formal settings. In: Proceedings of the
9th International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare.: IEEE; 2015 Aug 03 Presented at: 9th
International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare; May 20–23, 2015; Istanbul, Turkey. [doi:
10.4108/icst.pervasivehealth.2015.259109]
54. Andrykowski MA, Lykins E, Floyd A. Psychological health in cancer survivors. Semin Oncol Nurs 2008 Aug;24(3):193-201
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/j.soncn.2008.05.007] [Medline: 18687265]
55. Dale HL, Adair PM, Humphris GM. Systematic review of post-treatment psychosocial and behaviour change interventions
for men with cancer. Psychooncology 2010 Mar;19(3):227-237. [doi: 10.1002/pon.1598] [Medline: 19588538]
56. Sanches P, Janson A, Karpashevich P, Nadal C, Qu C, Roquet CD, et al. HCI and affective health: taking stock of a decade
of studies and charting future research directions. In: Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
https://cardio.jmir.org/2021/2/e30428 JMIR Cardio 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e30428 | p. 16
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR CARDIO Tadas et al
Computing Systems. 2019 Presented at: CHI '19: CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems; May 4 - 9,
2019; Glasgow Scotland UK p. 1-17. [doi: 10.1145/3290605.3300475]
57. Stawarz K, Preist C, Tallon D, Thomas L, Turner K, Wiles N, et al. Integrating the Digital and the Traditional to Deliver
Therapy for Depression: Lessons From a Pragmatic Study. 2020. URL: https://usabilitypanda.com/publications/
Stawarz2020_integrated_platform_evaluation.pdf[accessed 2021-09-17]
58. Beaudry J, Consigli A, Clark C, Robinson KJ. Getting ready for adult healthcare: designing a chatbot to coach adolescents
with special health needs through the transitions of care. J Pediatr Nurs 2019;49:85-91. [doi: 10.1016/j.pedn.2019.09.004]
[Medline: 31644960]
59. Calvo RA, Peters D. Positive Computing – Technology for Wellbeing and Human Potential. Cambridge, Massachusetts,
United States: MIT Press; 2017:1-298.
60. Terzimehić N, Häuslschmid R, Hussmann H, Schraefel MC. A review and analysis of mindfulness research in HCI: framing
current lines of research and future opportunities. In: Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. 2019 Presented at: CHI '19: CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems; May 4 - 9,
2019; Glasgow Scotland UK p. 1-13. [doi: 10.1145/3290605.3300687]
61. Konrad A, Bellotti V, Crenshaw N, Tucker S, Nelson L, Du H, et al. Finding the adaptive sweet spot: balancing compliance
and achievement in automated stress reduction. In: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. 2015 Presented at: CHI '15: CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems; April 18
- 23, 2015; Seoul Republic of Korea p. 3829-3838. [doi: 10.1145/2702123.2702512]
62. Hollis V, Konrad A, Springer A, Antoun M, Antoun C, Martin R, et al. What does all this data mean for my future mood?
Actionable analytics and targeted reflection for emotional well-being. Hum Comput Interact 2017 Mar 16;32(5-6):208-267
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1080/07370024.2016.1277724]
63. Susan M, Lou A, Robert W. The Behaviour Change Wheel : A Guide to Designing Interventions. Sutton, United Kingdom:
Silverback; 2014.
64. Michie S, van Stralen MM, West R. The behaviour change wheel: a new method for characterising and designing behaviour
change interventions. Implement Sci 2011 Apr 23;6:42 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/1748-5908-6-42] [Medline: 21513547]
Abbreviations
BCW: behavior change wheel
CVD: cardiovascular disease
HCI: human-computer interaction
NHS: National Health Service
TDF: Theoretical Domains Framework
Edited by G Eysenbach; submitted 13.05.21; peer-reviewed by L Russell, Z Xie; comments to author 04.06.21; revised version received
17.06.21; accepted 30.07.21; published 14.10.21
Please cite as:
Tadas S, Pretorius C, Foster EJ, Gorely T, Leslie SJ, Coyle D
Transitions in Technology-Mediated Cardiac Rehabilitation and Self-management: Qualitative Study Using the Theoretical Domains
Framework
JMIR Cardio 2021;5(2):e30428
URL: https://cardio.jmir.org/2021/2/e30428
doi: 10.2196/30428
PMID:
©Shreya Tadas, Claudette Pretorius, Emma J Foster, Trish Gorely, Stephen J Leslie, David Coyle. Originally published in JMIR
Cardio (https://cardio.jmir.org), 14.10.2021. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction
in any medium, provided the original work, first published in JMIR Cardio, is properly cited. The complete bibliographic
information, a link to the original publication on https://cardio.jmir.org, as well as this copyright and license information must
be included.
https://cardio.jmir.org/2021/2/e30428 JMIR Cardio 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e30428 | p. 17
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX