MÁTÉ JULESZ
A perspective on the European Health Data Space
At the time of writing this article, the European Health Data Space (EHDS) is under
development. A legal definition of the primary and secondary use of health data at
the supranational level is a given; however, the practice of cross-border e-health
still needs to be both legally and technically reinforced. Healthcare equality and
technological justice need to be observed when legislating on e-health at the nation-
al and supranational levels. Data altruism is a positive phenomenon in the second-
ary use of health data; nonetheless, the unethical exploitation of the health-related
data of digital citizens living with a chronic illness or other ailments should be
eliminated. While the extension of the European digital society to include other
digital societies as a whole might happen in the far future, the early results of the
already interconnected European e-health infrastructures are promising. Never-
theless, there is much to do to ensure patient safety via e-health.
Keywords: European Health Data Space, health data protection, healthcare equality, tech-
nological justice, health data altruism, patient’s right to digital self-determination
Author Information
Máté Julesz, University of Szeged, Department of Forensic Medicine
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0148-1857
How to cite this article:
Julesz, Máté. “A perspective on the European Health Data Space”.
Információs Társadalom XXIII, no. 4 (2023): 9–21.
https://dx.doi.org/10.22503/inftars.XXIII.2023.4.1
All materials
published in this journal are licenced
as CC-by-nc-nd 4.0
9
1. Introduction
Health data constitute a national asset that may be used for various purposes. While
it is important to respect patients’ interests in the protection of their health data,
we should not restrict the use of already existing health data for such purposes as
providing healthcare services outside national borders or for secondary use. The
infringement of patient’s right to health data protection is not only a problem for
civil and administrative law, it could also lead to criminal liability of the offender.
Criminal liability is, however, the last resort of the state, and its application varies
from country to country.
The administrative law on health data protection and the possible civil law con-
sequences of a violation of the personal right to health data protection are normally
a sufficient deterrent to protect health data from abuse, with no need for criminal
protection.
The future European Health Data Space (EHDS) necessitates protection by law
to ensure the safe operation of this e-health system across the EU. However, the
development of this cross-border institution and system will likely take many years
because of the prerequisite for both the legal and technical harmonization of Mem-
ber States’ national e-health systems.
A properly operated EHDS is a common EU goal, and all Member States’ national
e-health systems will join it sooner or later. National steps towards harmonization
can accelerate this process. The earlier the EHDS can be put in place, the earlier the
Member States’ national e-health infrastructures will be integrated into this supra-
national e-health infrastructure. Work in this area is driven by the Member States’
aim to supply their citizens with the higher level of patient safety and healthcare
quality that the EHDS can provide.
2. Cybersecurity and the protection of health data
On 3 May 2022, the European Commission put forward a proposal for regulation of
the EHDS to apply across the EU. National legislatures in Member States have until
2025 to respond to avoid any inconsistency between the proposed EU EHDS Regula-
tion and their own in the same field. The EHDS Regulation will be applicable in all
EU Member States from twelve months after coming into effect.
EHDS Regulation Proposal, Art. 8, declares as follows: “Where a Member State
accepts the provision of telemedicine services, it shall, under the same conditions,
accept the provision of the services of the same type by healthcare providers located
in other Member States”. The law on telemedicine has long been a battlefield for
health data protection. Health data communicated through the Internet is at risk of
exposure to cyberattacks. The European Network and Information Security Agency
(ENISA) was thus founded by Regulation 460/2004 of the European Parliament and
of the Council to strengthen trust in the digital economy, boost the resilience of the
EU’s infrastructure, and, ultimately, keep EU citizens digitally safe, particularly from
10
A perspective on the europeAn heAlth DAtA spAce
cyber attacks. In the period from April 2020 to June 2021, over 100 incidents were
reported to ENISA from the e-health sector alone.
Both legal and ethical problems can arise from the primary and secondary use
of the EHDS that is under development. For instance, in Hungary, the National
eHealth Infrastructure (EESZT) was launched in 2017 with the participation of pub-
lic healthcare providers and pharmacies. Under this system, from 1 January 2020,
all private healthcare providers, including private dentists alike, had to join this
eHealth Infrastructure and start reporting from 1 June 2020. According to Julesz
(2022, 32), “Telemedicine provides an ample source of health data. There is a fine
line between a legally permitted derogation from data protection and a violation of
law” (see also Julesz 2020; Kovács 2022; Nyitrai 2022). This statement mainly points
to the secondary use of health data, that is, the regulatory, scientific, and other im-
portant objectives that might infringe on patient privacy in a legally permitted way.
In February 2021, the Finnish Innovation Fund, Sitra, started a joint action with the
participation of twenty-five countries in Europe known as “Towards the European
Health Data Space (TEHDAS)”. The goal of TEHDAS is to offer support to EU Mem-
ber States and to the European Commission in developing guidelines to foster the
secondary use of health data, especially in managing and sharing data (Hendolin
2021, 16).
Health data are sensitive in most countries; however, the quality and measure of
this sensitivity largely depend on the functioning of the rule of law in specific coun-
tries. Whether the GDP or wealth of a country influences the observation of health
data protection at the national level is debatable, though there might be a remote
correlation. The quality of the rule of law can indeed have an immediate effect on
health data protection, while the level of patient safety and that of legal certainty
together affect the rule of law in daily practice.
Cybersecurity is an important aspect that must be ensured, directly or partly
indirectly, by the state to promote the legal rights of patients. This factor is at the
root of digital data protection. As early as 1998, Marsh (1998, 180) contended that
“making the medical information systems accessible by the Web raises problems of
unlawful access. Therefore, another building block in society should control the Pri-
vacy and Security of the stored data”. At that time, Euromed-ETS, a project financed
by the EU, was engaged in telemedicine security on the Internet.
Of course, cybersecurity has other facets as well. Bányász, Tóth, and László (2022,
100) hold that “cybersecurity has become more important in many respects, as vac-
cine research institutions have found themselves high on the list of targets for at-
tackers. An even more serious challenge is the vaccine-infodemic state, in which
many fake news stories are spread aimed at influencing public attitudes towards
certain vaccines”. This is another relevant problem that has attracted the attention
of today’s scientists and lawmakers. The Internet is a forum for both valid and false
information, and is only partly regulated by legislative measures. Ethical behaviour
among Internet users is simultaneously needed to provide patients/citizens with
trustworthy information on healthcare products and to keep patient health data
safe and secure.
11
Krzanowski and Polak (2022, 44) contend that the Internet as an epistemic agent
endeavours to rid us of our individual worldviews and substitute them for those
that favour its own epistemic agency positions and objectives (see also Héder et al.
2022). This assertion is obviously true; however, there are many other factors that
impact individuals’ opinions on their respective national healthcare systems and
healthcare in general. The universal values expressed by international legal docu-
ments highlight the basic principles that regulate the doctor–patient relationship. In
fact, protecting patient health data is one of the most important tasks for healthcare
providers today. The Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Art. 16, para.
2, declares that the European Parliament and the Council shall “lay down the rules
relating to the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal
data by Union institutions, bodies, offices, and agencies, and by the Member States
when carrying out activities which fall within the scope of Union law, and the rules
relating to the free movement of such data”.
3. The European Health Union and data ownership
Sandra Gallina, head of the European Commission’s Directorate General for Health
and Food Safety, argues that “The EU4Health programme will add €5.3 billion in
health promotion, diagnosis and treatment, and care to help countries boost their
health systems, strengthen their healthcare workforce, invest in trainings and ad-
vance their digital transformation” (Gallina 2023, 2). Gallina underlines the impor-
tance of the creation of a well-functioning European Health Union. I hold the same
position. The EU4Health programme and similar initiatives provide financial aid to
the construction of this long-awaited legal institution. Indeed, the practice of health
law is strongly linked to health data, and, without safe health data processing, Euro-
pean health law would remain a lame duck.
The EHDS, the creation of which is envisaged at the moment of writing this ar-
ticle, would be a domain-specific common European data space. It would serve to
protect individuals’ health data and provide them with the opportunity to control
their data. It would also help scholars, statisticians, health policymakers, and legis-
lators retrieve the data necessary for the commoda publica. This last possibility (the
secondary use of health data) requires a fair balance between patients’ individual
interests and the political, civil, economic, social, and cultural development of socie-
ty as a whole. MedTech Europe was founded in 2012 to promote the medical technol-
ogy industry. Horgan et al. (2022, 10) point out that “MedTech Europe highlighted the
need for a health data ecosystem that fosters trust and protects individuals’ rights
while unlocking the great potential of health data”.
Article 12, para. 4, of the European Commission’s proposed EHDS regulation de-
clares the following: “The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, adopt
the necessary measures for the technical development of MyHealth@EU.” Via My-
Health@EU, the citizens of an EU Member State can safely communicate their health
data in the language of another Member State. Healthcare documentation is thus
available not only in the patient’s language, but also in the language of physicians
12
A perspective on the europeAn heAlth DAtA spAce
practising in other Member States. The data safety ensured by the GDPR (General
Data Protection Regulation) needs to be respected when putting the free movement
of health data into practice. I would also wish to emphasize the role of electronic
health data in the administrative health law of national legal systems. This is an op-
portunity that is also found in the institution of the EHDS. In my opinion, it is always
best to build on already existing infrastructure and legal institutions. In this respect,
MyHealth@EU represents common ground in the EU. The existing technologies fur-
nish e-health with immeasurable experience that newly set-up technologies could
only make possible in the long run.
According to Directive 2011/24/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 9 March 2011 on the application of patients’ rights in cross-border healthcare, it
is already possible, for example, to obtain medicine in an EU Member State that has
been prescribed in another EU Member State. Unfortunately, this has not yet been ap-
plied in all Member States. According to a recent survey, “most responses highlighted
that most EU countries have not yet fully implemented open infrastructures for data
sharing” (Hussein et al. 2023, 4). However, if medicine is e-prescribed in Hungary, it
is obtainable in a pharmacy in Poland. In addition, in Croatia, the Electronic Health
Record contains information on a patient’s condition (such as an allergy) in Czech,
English, Spanish, and other languages, which might be life-saving for that EU citizen
in an emergency situation where the attending physician needs instant knowledge of
the patient’s history. Stellmach et al. (2022, 135) maintain that “The recommendations
set out in the EIT [European Institute of Innovation & Technology] would need to be
addressed by the European Commission in the future so that developers and provid-
ers of EHR [Electronic Health Record] systems, products and services can be given
a catalogue of approved international interoperability standards for semantics and
syntax that need to be adopted”. The already existing International Patient Summary
could be one of those standards. These patient summaries only contain the essential
health information linked to a patient, thus making it possible to treat the patient
abroad when necessary. However, this information might not be sufficient to initiate
medical malpractice litigation. More detailed healthcare documentation would be
required for that purpose. On the one hand, the EHDS certainly would not provide
the patient’s lawyer with sufficient evidence to use against the healthcare provider.
On the other hand, the provider would not be able to build their defence merely on
health information retrieved from the EHDS. The electronic healthcare documenta-
tion necessary for litigation should be sought in the national e-health systems of the
Member States, such as the National eHealth Infrastructure (EESZT) in Hungary.
Ursitti (2022, 126) argues that, “In the pre-industrial era, the gap between pro-
ducing and imagining was imperceptible, worthless and harmless; today, that is no
longer the case”. I share this opinion. Directive 2011/24/EU, Art. 14, declares that
“The Union shall support and facilitate cooperation and the exchange of informa-
tion among Member States working within a voluntary network connecting nation-
al authorities responsible for eHealth designated by the Member States”. However,
it could be postulated that providing patients with the right to the control of and
access to their e-health data has partly remained a dream in EU Member States be-
cause of its voluntariness.
13
The values represented by the supranational EU law mostly derive from univer-
sal values. Nevertheless, there might be some conflicts between laws at the national
and EU levels. Generally, however, Member States’ legislation tends to strictly abide
by EU law. In my opinion, with regard to personal rights to health and health data
protection, there is no inconsistency between the supranational and national leg-
islation. Hussein et al. (2023, 4) arrived at the following result: “Concerning data
ownership, most responses from the EU countries indicated that citizens own their
health data. This result could be a direct reflection of the wide implementation of
the GDPR across Europe”. Hussein et al. (2023, 4) also concluded that “the results of
the trustworthiness of health data are relatively high”.
4. Healthcare equality and technological justice
Genovese et al. (2022, 369) maintain that “None of the big health data transitions can
happen without society’s trust in the process”. I think that, among other relevant
aspects, the principle of healthcare equality also applies. The same level of health-
care should be provided for all patients, regardless of their real chance of gaining
digital access to their health data. Patients should be assured that they can receive a
standard level of healthcare within the EU independently of their ability to digitally
control and manage their health data. Yet today, the same level of healthcare cannot
be found in all EU Member States.
In addition to these remarks, there are also other noticeable comments on the
EHDS in the professional literature. For example, van Kessel et al. (2022, 1) contend
that “the EHDS might unintentionally disadvantage certain populations, including
older people, refugees, those on low incomes, those living with chronic conditions,
and some ethnic minority communities”. All these groups have special features that
preclude them from normal life. Positive discrimination is thus a legal and ethical
must to attain social justice and technological justice. EU court practice has already
acknowledged the legality of similar positive discrimination, for example, in the
case of job applications. Indeed, positive discrimination is rooted in the fabric of
European law and values, and needs to be maintained and even further developed.
Furthermore, the EU Member States should constitutionalize the institution of posi-
tive discrimination in legal matters as well as in the functioning of the state, society,
and economy as a whole. There is still a constitutional gap in this area in some Euro-
pean legal systems, which reflects ethical defects that need to be overcome by regu-
latory measures. Digitally disadvantaged minorities, whether ethnic or other kinds,
should be integrated into the digital society so as to finally establish supranational
technological justice. This would be the first step towards the creation of a global, or
at least a regional, digital society without the need for political globalization.
In its 2022 EHDS proposal, the Commission alluded to the subsidiarity of the
regulation when referring to the present-day deficiency of health data portability
and to the lack of interoperability of national, regional and local e-health infor-
mation systems. These deficiencies increase healthcare inequalities and should be
14
A perspective on the europeAn heAlth DAtA spAce
remedied by EU law. The existing technological injustice hampers social cohesion.
While the EU’s legislative efforts in this area are clear, it is too early to predict the
possible outcomes of putting the EHDS into action.
Butcher (2009, 57) argues that “by maximizing the liberties (freedom to use, free-
dom to distribute, freedom to modify and so on) associated with certain comput-
er software, an incentives-rich and stable environment can be established in ICT
[Information and Communication Technology] that will foster development of the
information economy among the information poor.” I agree. However, the “informa-
tion oligarchy”, also noted by Butcher (2009, 59), might pose a real threat to society
and the economy. I think we should have earlier prevented the technological, legal
and economic predominance of a relatively small number of information-wealthy
social actors. Now, it seems too late. Legislators’ hands are tied by the digital practice
in effect today. There is thus little space remaining for the state to place the infor-
mation society, including e-health, not only on a legal footing, but also on an ethical
one. All that might lead to deficiencies in technological justice, entailing healthcare
inequalities as well.
Nutbeam and Lloyd (2021, 162) differentiate between functional, interactive and
critical health literacy; whereby, functional health literacy refers to knowing how
to use the health system; interactive health literacy encompasses the application
of health information to the circumstances, including interactions with other peo-
ple, to make decisions; and critical health literacy is the ability to critically analyse
health information taken from various sources, resulting in an in-depth understand-
ing of the social, environmental and economic determinants of health. I think all
three types of health literacy are necessary for healthcare equality. I hold that inter-
active and critical health literacy cannot work without functional health literacy. In
fact, the EHDS can only function well in societies where digital citizens recognize the
relevance of this triad.
I side with Csótó in accentuating that, although economic poverty often goes hand
in hand with information poverty, there is not necessarily a causal connection be-
tween the two; indeed, a better-off citizen may also be information poor (Csótó 2017,
26). I think, nowadays, this argument is highly significant because our information
society tends to exclude the information poor. This tendency needs to be overcome
by promoting social justice – and not only legislatively. I am convinced that patients
whose e-health literacy is not in line with that of the majority patient population
might suffer healthcare inequalities in the long run. There are many who do not use
digital devices. Rab and Török (2022, 95) found that in Hungary, for example, 9.2%
of the adult population has no smartphone, smart TV, laptop, PC or smart watch
and is therefore excluded from the information society and thus e-health. I suppose
the imminence of the EHDS can accelerate the digitalization of the European social
strata now lagging behind. However, we should concentrate not on the states them-
selves, but rather on the disadvantaged groups within the European societies. Help
ought to be given to those excluded from technological justice and facing healthcare
inequality. While the principle of equality is rooted in ethics, its realization is largely
dependent on social capital.
15
5. Health data altruism
In its 2022 regulatory proposal, the European Commission considered the EHDS as a
cornerstone of the European Health Union. The Commission stressed the difficulties
that EU citizens face because of insufficiencies in the implementation of the GDPR
in Member States. The Commission also referred to the COVID-19 pandemic, which
has recently highlighted the necessity for a safe and secure cross-border access to
health data.
While it is true that the COVID-19 pandemic refined the aims of the EHDS, the
basic values and legal norms tied to the EHDS have not changed. Privacy and health
data protection remain primary, and legal exceptions are intended to promote the
greater good, that is, public health and scientific research. Undoubtedly though,
community health gained in importance during the pandemic. In my opinion, the
EHDS should also be a tool in the service of promoting community health. Health-
care workers and local volunteers should be granted authorization to retrieve
health data when necessary for the maintenance of the community health. This is
a sensitive question because a great many individual patients certainly would not
agree to this kind of disclosure of their health data. Therefore, there should be ade-
quately elaborated checks and balances to extend the scope of the EHDS to include
community health.
Health data altruism is the disclosing of patients’ health data voluntarily and
free of charge. With the introduction of the EHDS, the EU also aims to stress the
control of data altruism. A rulebook should be implemented to determine the neces-
sary criteria for data altruism tied to health data. It may be necessary, for example,
to permit authorized persons to gain access to health data purely to promote their
work in the service of the public. However, I think data altruism may lead to possi-
ble abuse of data, which would be counterproductive both for patients and society.
In a top-down way, a rigorous rulebook would help determine the framework for
data altruism as concerns the EHDS. The Data Governance Act will introduce the
institution of data altruism in the EU from September 2023. Bottom-up data altruism
remains an ethical option for individuals. Therefore, these individuals should enjoy
some sort of legal protection by the EU and the Member States. Certainly, there will
be legal disputes on how it is introduced, and the acceptable measure and quality of
data altruism will likely arise from those disputes at the national and supranational
levels. Shabani (2022, 1359) contends that “Newly proposed data altruism consent
… integrates the element of multiple secondary uses of data. The upcoming EHDS
regulation should clarify how these consent models will interplay in the context of
secondary uses of data in the framework of the EHDS”.
As a result of a global study involving 880 participants, Gefen et al. (2020, 552)
concluded that “Our findings show that 99% of people were willing to contribute
their data in exchange for monetary compensation and an analysis of their data,
while 53% were willing to pay to have their data analyzed”. As to the EHDS, I think
payments to data owners could be permitted for the secondary use of their health
data. I believe this option would not run counter to the EU’s basic rights and values.
16
A perspective on the europeAn heAlth DAtA spAce
I thus admit that a price could be put on health data. This price would be compen-
sation for patients abandoning their right to privacy. Naturally, however, personal
rights are of an absolute character, so everyone must observe them. Indeed, Art.
16, para. 1, of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union declares that
“everyone has the right to the protection of personal data concerning them”. None-
theless, this does not exclude data owners’ right to accept payment in exchange for
the commercial use of their data. In my opinion, payment would only be acceptable
for a commercial secondary use of health data. All other secondary uses should be
either based on data altruism or legal permission. Ethically, data altruism precedes
the commercialization of health data. In today’s legal, social and economic environ-
ments, the use of health data is too important to renounce for financial reasons.
There is a fine line between legally and ethically acceptable data altruism and in-
dividuals monetizing their health data. In the EU, the personal data economy is in-
creasingly fuelling present-day public governance.
I believe that the use of health data cannot be restricted to healthcare facilities
and pharmacies. National e-health infrastructures are linked to national health ad-
ministration systems, and individuals’ health data are ultimately also used in ad-
ministrative and judicial procedures. In my opinion, such use of health data should
not be onerous, and data owners should not be allowed to request payment. How-
ever, digital citizens may at times be unaware of the fact that software processes
their health-related data, which has been collected from web browsers. This kind
of health data use seems to be controversial both economically and legally. I think
those who draw profit from it should either pay for the health information under
civil law or forsake this practice. The effective administrative or criminal sanction-
ing of health data abuses is a public law response to the issue. We should put an end
to the unethical exploitation of digital citizens living with health problems by all
means.
6. The patient’s right to digital self-determination
Cingolani et al. (2023, 5) argue that “the implementation of AI [artificial intelligence]
must be accompanied by careful reflection on the part of the legislator to ensure
that the rights of citizens and patients are truly protected. For example, there is the
question of consent to the processing of personal health data by artificial intelli-
gence systems” (see also Héder 2021). Normally, governments and firms make use of
artificial intelligence in processing big data. As a consequence, some countries have
taken measures to account for this. In Germany, for example, a “computer funda-
mental right” was defined by the Federal Constitutional Court on 27 February 2008
to prevent any abuse of information systems (Hooghiemstra 2019, 172).
According to GDPR, Art. 9, the processing of health data is prohibited as a general
rule. Nevertheless, it is permitted when necessary for such areas as medical diag-
nosis and treatment or for protection against serious cross-border threats to health.
Article 9, para. 4, declares expressis verbis that “Member States may maintain or
17
introduce further conditions, including limitations, with regard to the processing of
genetic data, biometric data or data concerning health”. This rule defers to national
legislatures to adopt stricter rules when necessary. If it is consistent with this right, a
Member State’s national legislation cannot be successfully challenged before the EU
Court of Justice. Usually, a legally protected interest may enjoy more rigorous pro-
tection than required by an EU directive. A number of EU regulations also contain a
similar extension of the protection by national law.
Patients’ right to self-determination is a basic right that should be observed not
only by national e-health infrastructures, but also by the EHDS. Access to patients’
health data on areas such as addictive and psychiatric diseases, AIDS and sexually
transmitted diseases, ought to be restricted a priori. The sensitivity of health data
varies, but unless the patient explicitly grants permission to disclose such data, they
should not be accessible. The EHDS must not be permitted to lead to data abuse.
Overall, patients ought to be allowed to limit access to any of their health data.
These data should only be available to the attending physician without restriction in
the case of an emergency to save the patient’s or another natural person’s life and
health. In addition, the person, the date and the reason for access should be indicat-
ed, so that, later, the legality of such access may be checked.
Patients should be entitled to restrict access to their healthcare documents and
other health data in a way that only the treating doctor and the primary care physi-
cian can see them. Pharmacists’ access to health data could also be limited to e-pre-
scription data.
It is important to protect health data; however, patients exercising their right to
restrict access to their health data have to bear some responsibility too. A lack of
information might mislead the healthcare provider. The patient’s right to self-de-
termination is constitutionalized in most democratic states under the rule of law.
In healthcare, from a legal aspect, digital self-determination essentially differs from
the old perception of self-determination. Furthermore, e-health may result in a le-
gally more transparent medical practice because of the rigorous application of its
clear-cut rules. I wish to stress that the exercise of a citizen’s right to self-determina-
tion must not be detrimental to other citizens’ right to life and health. In healthcare,
the duty of professional secrecy may be overriden in such a situation. This is more
than an ethical question: it is the community’s legal right to self-defence that is rec-
ognised by the social actors as well as by the judiciary.
Patient autonomy has been the focus of a great many discussions on healthcare.
I hold that patient autonomy can strengthen a healthcare provider’s sense of se-
curity because the patient thus takes over ethical responsibility from the provider
to a certain extent. Indeed, e-health may be instrumental in the realisation of pa-
tient autonomy. I believe that, considering the pros and cons of e-health, the pros
prevail. The patient’s right to self-determination is at the core of healthcare prac-
tice, while the patient’s consent is a precondition for healthcare services, including
making a diagnosis, medical treatment and any other matter entailing health data
processing.
18
A perspective on the europeAn heAlth DAtA spAce
7. Conclusion
The EHDS is an EU e-health infrastructure project currently under development.
Besides the primary use of health data, its secondary use is also of great importance.
Health data constitute a national asset, which could be expanded supranational-
ly. Health data altruism is not only an ethical topic. In my opinion, digital citizens’
health data should not be exposed to commercial data harvesting without informed
consent and monetary compensation. However, the secondary use of health data for
scientific purposes or for the making of health policy or in legal procedures needs to
remain free of charge.
National e-health infrastructures should be connected to the EHDS to advance
telemedicine, patient safety and the secondary use of health data at the suprana-
tional level. Yet while some EU Member States’ national e-health infrastructures are
already interlinked, there is still a long road ahead to link them all. For instance,
medicine e-prescribed in Hungary may be obtained in pharmacies in Poland.
Certainly, cybersecurity is a key issue in health data protection. Further, pa-
tients’ right to digital self-determination may serve to provide legal protection for
health data. Indeed, I believe achieving healthcare equality and technological jus-
tice should be fundamental social aims of the EU because an adequately operated
supranational e-health infrastructure impacts not only the quality of cross-border
healthcare, but also the functioning of European societies. Importantly, widespread
e-health literacy – mainly though not only – in the eastern part of the EU is a pre-
condition for putting the EHDS into effect. As a consequence of digital globalisation,
technological justice and healthcare equality are strongly interrelated. In addition
to legislative measures, bottom-up social effects may also improve the quality of
e-health in the EU. Connecting the forthcoming EHDS to the e-health infrastructures
in other (groups of) democratic countries (such as that of the US) safely and securely
could give rise to a global digital society without the need for political globalisation.
References
Bányász, Péter, András Tóth, and Gábor László. “A sentiment analysis of the civic attitude
in connection with the coronavirus vaccines.” Információs Társadalom 22, no. 1 (2022):
99–125.
https://dx.doi.org/10.22503/inftars.XXII.2022.1.6
Butcher, Matthew P. “At the foundations of information justice.” Ethics and Information
Technology 11, no. 1 (2009): 57–69.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-009-9181-2
Cingolani, Mariano, Roberto Scendoni, Piergiorgio Fedeli, and Fabio Cembrani. “Artificial
intelligence and digital medicine for integrated home care services in Italy: Opportunities
and limits.” Frontiers in Public Health 10 (2023): Article Number 1095001.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2022.1095001
19
Csótó, Mihály. “Are the poorest the information poor? The various forms of information
poverty.” Információs Társadalom 17, no. 2 (2017): 8–29.
https://dx.doi.org/10.22503/inftars.XVII.2017.2.1
Gallina, Sandra. “Preparing Europe for future health threats and crises: the European Health
Union.” Eurosurveillance 28, no. 5 (2023): Article Number 2300066.
https://www.eurosurveillance.org/content/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2023.28.5.2300066
Gefen, Gilie, Omer Ben-Porat, Moshe Tennenholtz, and Elad Yom-Tov. “Privacy, Altruism, and
Experience: Estimating the Perceived Value of Internet Data for Medical Uses.” In WWW
‘20: Companion Proceedings of the Web Conference 2020, 552–556. Taipei, Taiwan: WWW:
International World Wide Web Conference, 2020.
https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3366424.3383414
Genovese, Stefano, Rafael Bengoa, John Bowis, Mary Harney, Bastian Hauck, Michel Pinget, Mike
Leers, Tarja Stenvall, and Nick Guldemond. “The European Health Data Space: a step towards
digital and integrated care systems.” Journal of Integrated Care 30, no. 4 (2022): 363–372.
https://doi.org/10.1108/JICA-11-2021-0059
Héder, Mihály. “AI and the resurrection of Technological Determinism.” Információs
Társadalom 21, no. 2 (2021): 119–130.
https://dx.doi.org/10.22503/inftars.XXI.2021.2.8
Héder, Mihály, Ernő Rigó, Dorottya Medgyesi, Róbert Lovas, Szabolcs Tenczer, Ferenc Török,
Attila Farkas, Márk Emődi, József Kadlecsik, György Mező, Ádám Pintér, and Péter Kacsuk.
“The Past, Present and Future of the ELKH Cloud.” Információs Társadalom 22, no. 2 (2022):
128–137.
https://dx.doi.org/10.22503/inftars.XXII.2022.2.8
Hendolin, Minna. “Towards the European Health Data Space: from diversity to a common
framework.” Eurohealth 27, no. 2 (2021): 15–17.
https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/352268/Eurohealth-27-2-15-17-eng.pdf
Hooghiemstra, Theo. “Informational Self-Determination, Digital Health and New Features of
Data Protection.” European Data Protection Law Review 5, no. 2 (2019): 160–174.
https://doi.org/10.21552/edpl/2019/2/6
Horgan, Denis, Marian Hajduch, Marilena Vrana, Jeannette Soderberg, Nigel Hughes,
Muhammad Imran Omar, Jonathan A. Lal, Marta Kozaric, Fidelia Cascini, Verena Thaler,
Oriol Solà-Morales, Mário Romão, Frédéric Destrebecq, and Edith Sky Gross. “European
Health Data Space – An Opportunity Now to Grasp the Future of Data-Driven Healthcare.”
Healthcare 10, no. 9 (2022): Article Number 1629.
https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare10091629
Hussein, Rada, Lucas Scherdel, Frederic Nicolet, and Fernando Martin-Sanchez. “Towards the
European Health Data Space (EHDS) ecosystem: A survey research on future health data
scenarios.” International Journal of Medical Informatics 170 (2023): Article Number 104949.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2022.104949
Julesz, Máté. “Health equity and health data protection related to telemedicine amid the
COVID-19 pandemic.” Információs Társadalom 22, no. 2 (2022): 27–38.
https://dx.doi.org/10.22503/inftars.XXII.2022.2.2
Julesz, Máté. “Telemedicine and COVID–19 pandemic.” Információs Társadalom 20, no. 3
(2020): 27–38.
https://dx.doi.org/10.22503/inftars.XX.2020.3.2
20
A perspective on the europeAn heAlth DAtA spAce
Kovács, Gábor. “Liability issues of the telemedicine service.” Információs Társadalom 22, no.
3 (2022): 61–74.
https://dx.doi.org/10.22503/inftars.XXII.2022.3.4
Krzanowski, Roman, and Pawel Polak. “The Internet as an Epistemic Agent (EA).” Információs
Társadalom 22, no. 2 (2022): 39–56.
https://dx.doi.org/10.22503/inftars.XXII.2022.2.3
Marsh, Andy. “The Creation of a global telemedical information society.” International Journal
of Medical Informatics 49, no. 2 (1998): 173–193.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1386-5056(98)00039-2
Nutbeam, Don, and Jane E. Lloyd. “Understanding and Responding to Health Literacy as a
Social Determinant of Health.” Annual Review of Public Health 42 (2021): 159–173.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-publhealth-090419-102529
Nyitrai, Endre. “The importance of national data assets in the work of law enforcement
agencies.” Információs Társadalom 22, no. 1 (2022): 67–80.
https://dx.doi.org/10.22503/inftars.XXII.2022.1.4
Rab, Árpád, and Bernát Török. “The technological environment of e-health in Hungarian
society.” Információs Társadalom 22, no. 3 (2022): 93–99.
https://dx.doi.org/10.22503/inftars.XXII.2022.3.6
Shabani, Mahsa. “Will the European Health Data Space change data sharing rules?” Science
375, no. 6587 (2022): 1357–1359.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abn4874
Stellmach, Caroline, Michael R. Muzoora, and Sylvia Thun. “Digitalization of Health Data:
Interoperability of the Proposed European Health Data Space.” Studies in Health Technology
and Informatics 298 (2022): 132–136.
https://doi.org/10.3233/SHTI220922
Ursitti, Filippo. “The techne as producer of outdated humans.” Információs Társadalom 22, no.
2 (2022): 117–127.
https://dx.doi.org/10.22503/inftars.XXII.2022.2.7
van Kessel, Robin, Brian Li Han Wong, Rebecca Forman, Jonila Gabrani, and Elias Mossialos.
“The European Health Data Space fails to bridge digital divides.” British Medical Journal
378 (2022): Article Number e071913.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj-2022-071913
21