JMIR REHABILITATION AND ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES Alder et al
Original Paper
A Brain Computer Interface Neuromodulatory Device for Stroke
Rehabilitation: Iterative User-Centered Design Approach
Gemma Alder1, MSc; Denise Taylor1, PhD; Usman Rashid1, PhD; Sharon Olsen1, PhD; Thonia Brooks1, BTECH,
HRM; Gareth Terry1, PhD; Imran Khan Niazi1,2,3, PhD; Nada Signal1, PhD
1Rehabilitation Innovation Centre, Health and Rehabilitation Research Institute, Auckland University of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand
2Centre for Chiropractic Research, New Zealand College of Chiropractic, Auckland, New Zealand
3Sensory Motor Integration, Department of Health Science and Technology, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark
Corresponding Author:
Gemma Alder, MSc
Rehabilitation Innovation Centre, Health and Rehabilitation Research Institute
Auckland University of Technology
(A-11), Private Bag 92006
Auckland, 1142
New Zealand
Phone: 64 9 921 9999 ext 7815
Email: gemma.alder@aut.ac.nz
Abstract
Background: Rehabilitation technologies for people with stroke are rapidly evolving. These technologies have the potential to
support higher volumes of rehabilitation to improve outcomes for people with stroke. Despite growing evidence of their efficacy,
there is a lack of uptake and sustained use in stroke rehabilitation and a call for user-centered design approaches during technology
design and development. This study focuses on a novel rehabilitation technology called exciteBCI, a complex neuromodulatory
wearable technology in the prototype stage that augments locomotor rehabilitation for people with stroke. The exciteBCI consists
of a brain computer interface, a muscle electrical stimulator, and a mobile app.
Objective: This study presents the evaluation phase of an iterative user-centered design approach supported by a qualitative
descriptive methodology that sought to (1) explore users’perspectives and experiences of exciteBCI and how well it fits with
rehabilitation, and (2) facilitate modifications to exciteBCI design features.
Methods: The iterative usability evaluation of exciteBCI was conducted in 2 phases. Phase 1 consisted of 3 sprint cycles
consisting of single usability sessions with people with stroke (n=4) and physiotherapists (n=4). During their interactions with
exciteBCI, participants used a “think-aloud” approach, followed by a semistructured interview. At the end of each sprint cycle,
device requirements were gathered and the device was modified in preparation for the next cycle. Phase 2 focused on a “near-live”
approach in which 2 people with stroke and 1 physiotherapist participated in a 3-week program of rehabilitation augmented by
exciteBCI (n=3). Participants completed a semistructured interview at the end of the program. Data were analyzed from both
phases using conventional content analysis.
Results: Overall, participants perceived and experienced exciteBCI positively, while providing guidance for iterative changes.
Five interrelated themes were identified from the data: (1) “This is rehab” illustrated that participants viewed exciteBCI as having
a good fit with rehabilitation practice; (2) “Getting the most out of rehab” highlighted that exciteBCI was perceived as a means
to enhance rehabilitation through increased engagement and challenge; (3) “It is a tool not a therapist,” revealed views that the
technology could either enhance or disrupt the therapeutic relationship; and (4) “Weighing up the benefits versus the burden”
and (5) “Don’t make me look different” emphasized important design considerations related to device set-up, use, and social
acceptability.
Conclusions: This study offers several important findings that can inform the design and implementation of rehabilitation
technologies. These include (1) the design of rehabilitation technology should support the therapeutic relationship between the
patient and therapist, (2) social acceptability is a design priority in rehabilitation technology but its importance varies depending
on the use context, and (3) there is value in using design research methods that support understanding usability in the context of
sustained use.
https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023 | vol. 10 | e49702 | p. 1
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR REHABILITATION AND ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES Alder et al
(JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023;10:e49702) doi: 10.2196/49702
KEYWORDS
user-centered design; stroke; rehabilitation technology; wearable technology; brain computer interface; BCI; mobile app;
think-aloud; near live; semistructured interviews
must include a user-centered approach [45]. In this paper, we
Introduction
present a complex neuromodulatory rehabilitation technology
(exciteBCI) and its evaluation in a user-centered design research
Background
process.
Stroke is a major health, socioeconomic, and financial burden
that affects over 12 million people worldwide annually [1]. exciteBCI
Despite advances in stroke prevention, the incidence of stroke exciteBCI is a prototype, portable, medical wearable device
is anticipated to rise due to population growth and aging [2]. designed to deliver neuromodulation during locomotor
Following a stroke, up to 80% of individuals experience rehabilitation for people with stroke. The device uses a brain
difficulty with locomotion [3,4]. Locomotion refers to the ability computer interface in which a specific electroencephalography
to move from one place to another [5] and encompasses a wide signal, which reflects the person’s intention to move, is extracted
range of activities such as getting on and off a chair; walking and paired with the afferent stimulus from peripheral electrical
indoors; climbing stairs; and navigating obstacles, terrains, and stimulation [46,47]. The electrical stimulation is timed to
environments. While most people with stroke regain some ability coincide precisely with the electroencephalography signal in
to walk unassisted, less than 20% achieve unrestricted the motor cortex to induce neural plasticity [46,47].
community locomotion [6,7]. Rehabilitation can reduce
exciteBCI evolved from an endeavor to translate a
locomotor disability following stroke, particularly when
neuromodulatory intervention that had been tested in healthy
delivered in large volumes [8-14], yet observational studies
and stroke populations in a clinical research laboratory setting
confirm the amount of rehabilitation received is limited,
[46-54] into a rehabilitation device suitable for stroke
translating into poorer outcomes for people with stroke and
rehabilitation. Prior feasibility work found that the
consequent lifelong disability [15-20]. Thus, innovative
neuromodulatory intervention, when delivered during simple
approaches for stroke rehabilitation are required.
ankle movements while seated, was not acceptable to people
The last 2 decades have witnessed the rapid development of with stroke and was not feasible for rehabilitation [55]. The
rehabilitation technologies, such as robotics, virtual reality, equipment was deemed cumbersome and uncomfortable, the
neuromodulation devices, activity monitors, and mobile apps set-up time was excessive, and the movement tasks were
designed to augment rehabilitation after stroke. While there is considered meaningless and boring by people with stroke. Given
evidence that these technologies can increase the amount of that qualitative evidence indicates that rehabilitation should be
rehabilitation a person with stroke receives and improve centered on meaningful real-world activities that reflect a
outcomes [13,14,21-26], user adoption and sustained use of person’s aspirations and should be practiced at progressively
such technologies remains low [27-33]. The disconnect between higher intensities [56,57], these perspectives have important
initial efficacy and clinical translation likely relates to the ramifications for the implementation of the intervention in
usability of these technologies and their acceptability to users clinical practice and for ensuring sustained use.
[34,35]. As a result, there has been a call for increased
The iterative user-centered design process for developing
application of user-centered design approaches in the
exciteBCI was guided by the International Organization for
development of rehabilitation technologies [35-37]. Adopting
Standardization (ISO) 9241-210:2010 standard [38] and was
user-centered design approaches can support the development
driven by a transdisciplinary team comprising physiotherapists,
of usable and acceptable technologies by prioritizing user needs,
biomedical engineers, product designers, user experience and
involving users and relevant stakeholders throughout the project
user interface designers, and a lived experience researcher.
life cycle, and modifying the design of the technology based
Initial work involved the following three phases: (1)
on iterative user-centered evaluation [38,39].
understanding and specifying the context of use, (2) identifying
Noninvasive neuromodulatory interventions are rehabilitation user requirements, and (3) iteratively developing design
technologies with the potential to maximize rehabilitation solutions [58]. This paper reports the fourth stage of the ISO
outcomes and reduce physical disability. Typically, these 9241-210:2010 standard [38]: (4) evaluating the design. The
interventions involve repeated magnetic or electrical stimulation aims of this research were to (1) explore users’perspectives
of the central and peripheral nervous systems to induce neural and experiences of exciteBCI and how well it fits with
plasticity [40]. Noninvasive neuromodulatory interventions that rehabilitation, and (2) facilitate modifications to exciteBCI
target movement control have the potential to accelerate stroke design features.
recovery when combined with traditional rehabilitation [41-44].
However, such interventions often rely on complex medical
devices and user interfaces operated by expert operators, and
lack usability and acceptability. To maximize the potential for
successful implementation in rehabilitation practice, research
and development of noninvasive neuromodulatory technologies
https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023 | vol. 10 | e49702 | p. 2
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR REHABILITATION AND ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES Alder et al
were people who had experienced a stroke and physiotherapists
Methods
working in stroke rehabilitation. This study consisted of 2
phases. In phase 1, a series of usability testing sprint cycles
Study Design
were conducted [59]. In phase 2, a “near-live” [60] testing
The evaluation phase of an iterative user-centered design
approach was used, in which 2 participants with stroke and a
approach supported by a qualitative descriptive methodology
physiotherapist undertook a 3-week intervention of locomotor
was used to address the aims of this study. In this study, users
rehabilitation augmented by exciteBCI (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Overview of study design, data collection procedures, and data analysis. PwS: people with stroke.
exciteBCI Prototype
Ethical Considerations
The exciteBCI prototype evaluated in this research is intended
The study was approved by the New Zealand Health and
for clinical use in collaboration with a qualified physiotherapist
Disability Ethics Committee (17/NTA/177), and locality
in an inpatient, outpatient, or community setting. exciteBCI has
authorization was endorsed by the Auckland University of
3 components: 2 wearable components, including an
Technology Ethics Committee (17/373). Before the study, all
electroencephalography headset and a muscle stimulator, and
participants provided written informed consent. The privacy
a third component, a mobile app. The 3 components
and confidentiality of participants was protected by secure
communicate wirelessly (Figure 2).
storage of all data and deidentification of data where feasible.
Participants received an NZ $40 (US $24) gift voucher for each
session they attended in acknowledgment of their contributions.
https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023 | vol. 10 | e49702 | p. 3
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR REHABILITATION AND ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES Alder et al
Figure 2. The exciteBCI consists of 3 components: an electroencephalography headset, a muscle stimulator, and a mobile app, each of which communicates
wirelessly.
The electroencephalography headset included 9 gel electrodes included locomotor tasks cued with an audiovisual prompt. The
capable of recording brain activity that was used to predict when locomotor tasks could be selected, and the task parameters such
the person with stroke was going to move. The muscle stimulator as number of repetitions, movement speed, and rest time
(NeuroTrac Rehab) was housed within a neoprene sleeve and manipulated to create an individualized locomotor rehabilitation
worn during rehabilitation tasks to deliver electrical stimulation program. See Figure 3 for example screenshots from the
to a lower limb muscle. The muscle stimulator delivered the exciteBCI app interface prototype v3.3. This version of the app
afferent stimulus which was paired with electroencephalography was presented to participants during the first sprint cycle of
brain activity to induce neural plasticity. The exciteBCI app phase 1.
was designed to support the delivery of the intervention. It
https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023 | vol. 10 | e49702 | p. 4
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR REHABILITATION AND ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES Alder et al
Figure 3. Example screenshots from the exciteBCI app interface prototype v3.3. (A) Registering a new patient, (B) the task selection suite where the
patient and therapist select tasks that align with the patient’s goals, (C) the parameters that can be manipulated for each task by the therapist to ensure
an optimal level of task difficulty, (D) checking the impedance levels of the electroencephalography headset, (E) the muscle stimulator is connected to
the app and stimulation amplitude saved, (F) the patient watches a video on how to perform the task, (G-H) the timing signal (auditory-visual cue) to
get ready and execute the task, and (I) the patient completes the task difficulty and confidence ratings at the end of the task set.
[61], followed by a semistructured interview [62] (refer to Figure
Participants
1). At the end of each sprint cycle, user device requirements
People diagnosed with a stroke at least 6 months prior who were compiled, and changes were made to the user interface
presented with some restriction of the foot and ankle movement and device before the next sprint cycle began. Participants were
limiting locomotor function were recruited. People with English asked to use a “think-aloud” process by verbalizing their
language limitations, cognitive, perceptual, and communication thoughts, observations, and opinions while interacting with the
impairments, who were unable to engage in the research process exciteBCI prototype in a planned series of activities (Textbox
even with the support of a family member or a health 1). The researcher’s interactions were kept to a minimum to
professional, were excluded. New Zealand registered support participants to fully engage in the “think-aloud” process,
physiotherapists with at least 5 years of professional experience but, when necessary, the researcher prompted the participant
in the field of neurological rehabilitation were recruited. with phrases like “tell me what you’re thinking now.” Video
Networking with local health care and rehabilitation providers and audio recordings, photographs, and researcher observations
and community advertising were used to recruit a convenience (TB SO, and UR) were used to capture the think-aloud process.
sample of participants. All participants provided written Semistructured interviews were conducted by 2 experienced
informed consent before participating in the study. researchers (GA and NS). The interviews were audio-recorded
and focused on participants’experiences and opinions of the
Procedures and Data Collection
device, functionality, design features, and suggested
Phase 1: Think-Aloud Sprint Cycles improvements. See Multimedia Appendix 1 for phase 1
indicative interview questions. Consecutive participants
People with stroke (n=4) and physiotherapists (n=4) participated
participated in the sprint cycles until no new insights or changes
in a single 1-hour usability testing session, where they interacted
to the exciteBCI device's design features were provided [63,64].
with the exciteBCI prototype using a “think-aloud” approach
https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023 | vol. 10 | e49702 | p. 5
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR REHABILITATION AND ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES Alder et al
Textbox 1. Examples of activities used in phase 1 sprint cycles to facilitate the “think-aloud” process.
Physiotherapists
• Use the tablet to complete the initial client registration (10-15 min).
• Use the tablet to design a task-specific training program for a client (10-15 min).
• Follow the instructions to set-up the headset (10-15 min).
• Follow the instructions to set-up the electrical stimulation and place electrodes on the tibialis anterior muscle (10-15 min).
• Calibrate the system—complete the task-specific training while the headset records your model’s brain signals (10-20 min).
• Complete task-specific training while your model receives the paired intervention (5-10 min).
• Remove the headset and electrical stimulation device (5-10 min).
People with stroke
• Now you are set-up, follow the cue on the tablet to perform the exercises and we will record your brain signals (20-25 min).
• Follow the cue on the tablet screen to complete the exercises while receiving the neuromodulatory intervention (20-30 min).
• Please rate how difficult it was to perform that task and how confident you felt performing the task (5-10 min).
• Donning and doffing of equipment (10-15 min).
As the time spent on each activity varied across participants, a time range (min) has been listed against each activity. Similarly, the number of
task-specific training exercises and associated repetitions varied across participants (2-4 exercises 20-80 repetitions per exercise). For the physiotherapist
session, the model was a member of the research team.
anterior muscle to coincide with the person’s intended
Phase 2: Near-Live Program of Rehabilitation
movement. Approximately 10 minutes of the 1-hour session
A “near-live” testing approach [60] was carried out in which 2 was attributed to the donning and doffing of the equipment.
people with stroke engaged in a 3-week program of locomotor
All rehabilitation sessions were video-recorded, researcher
rehabilitation augmented by exciteBCI (Soft Headset v2, App
observation notes (NS and TB) of the participant interactions
v3.6, Electrical Stimulator v.3). Eight 1-hour rehabilitation
with the exciteBCI prototype were recorded, and photographs
sessions were conducted in an outpatient clinical setting
were taken at each session. Following completion of the
supervised by a New Zealand registered physiotherapist with
rehabilitation program, the participants with stroke and the
10 years of clinical experience in stroke rehabilitation (GA).
physiotherapist (GA) took part in separate semistructured
Before the rehabilitation sessions, participants attended an initial
interviews. Interviews were conducted by 2 experienced
assessment and planning session to establish locomotor-related
researchers (GT and SM) who were not involved in the
goals and completed clinical outcome measures. Clinical
development of the exciteBCI. The interview focused on the
measures included the 30-second chair stand test, 10-m walk
participants’opinions and experiences of using the device within
test; 6-minute walk test; four step square test, and lower limb
a rehabilitation context and included specific questions in
muscle strength testing of the ankle dorsiflexors, ankle plantar
response to video observations of the rehabilitation program.
flexors, knee extensors, and hip flexors using a handheld
All interviews were audio-recorded. See the Multimedia
dynamometer [65]. Clinical measures were repeated at the end
Appendix 1section for phase 2 indicative interview questions.
of the rehabilitation program.
Data Analysis
The rehabilitation program was based on current evidence-based
practice as recommended in the National and International “Think-aloud” and interview data were transcribed verbatim.
Clinical Guidelines for Stroke [66-68] and included The transcripts and written observation notes were imported
goal-oriented task-specific training of locomotor-related skills into NVivo 12 (Lumivero) computer software package [70].
that were deemed important to the participant. The Data analysis was undertaken in 2 stages. In the first stage,
physiotherapist prescribed 3 to 4 different tasks from the suite transcripts and videos were descriptively analyzed by the
of tasks within the tablet-based exciteBCI app per session. primary researcher (GA) to identify user interface and device
Informed by the principles of motor learning [69], the requirements within each sprint cycle. This analysis was then
rehabilitation tasks were progressed over the program based on discussed with the team to inform the development of the device
the participant’s rating of perceived difficulty for each task before the next cycle. This analysis also served as a
using a numerical visual analog scale. Task parameters were familiarization process for the second stage of analysis.
manipulated or new tasks were prescribed to achieve a challenge
The second stage of analysis focused on addressing the aim,
point of 6 to 8 out of 10 on the task difficulty visual analog scale
exploring users’ perspectives and experiences of exciteBCI,
for each task [57]. Participants completed between 30 and 100
and how well it fits with rehabilitation. This stage used a
repetitions of each task during the 1-hour session. The
modified version of conventional content analysis [71] to
participants used the exciteBCI throughout the rehabilitation
analyze the data from both phases of the study. Conventional
program, which delivered electrical stimulation to the tibialis
https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023 | vol. 10 | e49702 | p. 6
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR REHABILITATION AND ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES Alder et al
content analysis allows the researcher to immerse themselves of themes. The coded data, categories, and prototype themes
in the data to acquire an accurate description of what participants were reviewed and discussed with 2 researchers (NS and GT)
experienced and understood about the topic at hand [62]. The in a series of analysis meetings to ensure consistency of
data were coded inductively by the primary researcher (GA) at interpretation.
the sentence or phrase level, and a semantic coding framework
Results
was iteratively developed during the data analysis process [72].
Several activities were used to enhance the understanding of Overall
code relationships, such as continuous comparisons within and
A total of 11 people participated in the study with no reported
between codes and data sources, as well as the practice of
adverse events. Table 1presents the demographic and clinical
memoing to capture initial insights about the data and potential
characteristics of the participants, and Figure 4 displays
interactions among codes [73]. The coded data iteratively
photographs of participants interacting with the device in phases
informed the development of categories. Categories and
1 and 2 of usability testing. In the interest of intellectual property
representative coded data were visually represented using a
protection, the iterative device requirements for the user
mind map in the MIRO Application to support the development
interface and the device are not presented in this paper.
https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023 | vol. 10 | e49702 | p. 7
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR REHABILITATION AND ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES Alder et al
Table 1. Participant characteristics (n=11).
Demographic and clinical characteristics Value
People with stroke (n=6)
Type of stroke, n (%)
Ischemic 3 (50)
Hemorrhagic 3 (50)
Lesion location, n (%)
Right hemisphere 4 (67)
Left hemisphere 2 (33)
Time since stroke (y), mean (SD; range) 7 (6.7; 2-19)
Types of impairments, n (%)a
Motor 6 (100)
Sensory 4 (67)
Perceptual 2 (33)
Cognition 2 (33)
Communication 1 (17)
Functional ambulation category scores [74], n (%)
0b 0 (0)
1c 0 (0)
2d 1 (17)
3e 1 (17)
4f 3 (50)
5g 1 (17)
Prior experience of technology components, n (%)
FESh
Clinical 4 (67)
Research 3 (50)
No experience 1 (17)
BCIi
Clinical 0 (0)
Research 3 (50)
No experience 3 (50)
Mobile app–based interventions
Clinical 0 (0)
Research 0 (0)
No experience 6 (100)
Sex, n (%)
Female 3 (50)
Male 3 (50)
Ethnicity, n (%)
Asian 1 (17)
European 2 (33)
https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023 | vol. 10 | e49702 | p. 8
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR REHABILITATION AND ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES Alder et al
Demographic and clinical characteristics Value
New Zealander 3 (50)
Age (y), n (%)
<45 1 (17)
45-65 2 (33)
>65 3 (50)
Physiotherapists (n=5), n (%)
Years qualified as a physiotherapist
5-10 1 (20)
10-20 3 (60)
>20 1 (20)
Highest qualification
Bachelor of Science 4 (80)
Masters 1 (20)
Years of clinical experience in stroke rehabilitation
5-10 3 (60)
10-20 1 (20)
>20 1 (20)
Prior experience of technology components
FESj
2-12 5 (100)
BCIk
3 (research context) 1 (20)l
Mobile apps for rehabilitationm
3-10 5 (100)
Sex
Female 5 (100)
Ethnicity
European 2 (40)
New Zealander 3 (60)
an>6 due to some participants presenting with multiple impairments.
bNonfunctional walker (unable to walk).
cDependent walker requires continues manual contact.
dDependent walker requires intermittent manual contact.
eDependent walker requires verbal supervision or guiding.
fIndependent walker on level surfaces only.
gIndependent walker on any surface.
hFES: functional electrical stimulation (n>6 due to experience in more than 1 category).
iBCI: brain computer interface.
jYears experience using functional electrical stimulation.
kYears experience using brain computer interfaces.
lPrimary author: GA.
mYears experience using mobile apps for rehabilitation. Video mobile apps to capture patient performance and exercise provision mobile apps.
https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023 | vol. 10 | e49702 | p. 9
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR REHABILITATION AND ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES Alder et al
Figure 4. Photographs of participants from phase 1 sprint cycles and phase 2 “near-live” 3-week program interacting with the exciteBCI device. (A)
A participant with stroke and physiotherapist work in partnership to select task-specific training exercises in the exciteBCI app, (B) a physiotherapist
participant setting up the electroencephalography headset, (C) a physiotherapist setting up the muscle stimulator on a participant with stroke, (D-F)
participants with stroke engaging in locomotor rehabilitation while wearing the exciteBCI device and receiving the neuromodulatory intervention with
the physiotherapist, (G) a participant with stroke using the app rating scale of perceived rehabilitation task difficulty to inform the physiotherapist about
the challenge-point of the task.
Overall, the findings showed that participants with stroke and Getting the most out of rehab, (3) It is a tool not a therapist, (4)
physiotherapists had positive perceptions and experiences of Weighing up the benefits versus the burden, and (5) Don’t make
the exciteBCI intervention and could see it being used in a me look different. Illustrative quotes that corroborated the data
rehabilitation context. Five themes were generated from the have been selected for thematic representation, and pseudonyms
data, as illustrated in Figure 5. Central was the theme (1) This have been used.
is rehab, which interacted and was influenced by the themes (2)
https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023 | vol. 10 | e49702 | p. 10
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR REHABILITATION AND ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES Alder et al
Figure 5. The relationship of themes associated with the users’perceptions and experiences of exciteBCI, and how well it fits with rehabilitation.
With an external stimulus like the FES hand switch,
Theme 1: This Is Rehab
I need to try and time it right. So, it’s not that it’s not
At the core of the findings was the theme, “This is Rehab.” inconvenient it’s just[...] makes more sense to take
Despite being a novel technology incorporating a brain computer the relationship internally rather than externally. It’s
interface and app, both physiotherapists and people with stroke the patients driving it[...] And I think that will
identified that the exciteBCI was clearly a rehabilitative tool facilitate learning more. [Sarah, Physiotherapist,
suitable for supporting and augmenting rehabilitation practice: Sprint cycle 2]
At first, I thought, it’s not a new treatment [...] we’re Physiotherapists described how the exciteBCI app would support
doing something that’s extra, but it’s basically just them in delivering effective rehabilitation by supporting their
facilitating what we’re doing anyway. [Sarah, clinical reasoning process, enabling specificity in the design of
Physiotherapist, Sprint cycle 2] rehabilitation programs, and promoting efficiency. They
particularly valued how the exciteBCI app aided them in
For clinical use, the intervention worked brilliantly.
thinking about different aspects of task-specific training.
[Anni, Age 58, PwS, 3-wk program]
However, they also consistently emphasized the importance of
Many expressed surprise at how congruent the technology was
tailoring rehabilitation to individuals.
with their own clinical practice and understanding of
rehabilitation principles. This congruence appeared to enhance This prompted them to describe additional app features which
perceptions of usability and acceptability. They readily identified might support further personalization:
ways in which the technology could be integrated into current
What this shows [points to video playing task], it’s
rehabilitation practices:
the goal of doing it perfectly well, but it might not
It doesn’t seem to be over complicated, and once you look like that for them [the client]. Would be great if
use it on a daily basis more or less it’s actually not the actual client performing the task can be
that difficult.[Zoe Physiotherapist, Sprint cycle 2] videotaped as well. [Sarah, Physiotherapist Sprint
cycle 2]
Participants were easily able to understand the purpose and
mechanism of the intervention. Physiotherapist participants Shopping bags, washing basket so they are the things
drew on their understanding of functional electrical stimulation that we would [...] quite commonly do, but [...] when
(FES), a modality commonly used in clinical practice, in I choose secondary tasks, I often choose things that
understanding the physiological underpinnings of the paired I know this patient is going to do and relates to their
neuromodulatory intervention. They identified that the exciteBCI goals [...] so a customize option is essential [Zoe,
device could offer benefits over FES, particularly in relation to Physiotherapist Sprint cycle 2]
the way the person’s own brain signals are used to drive the Attention to an efficient workflow, minimizing duplication of
delivery of electrical simulation, and suggested that this would information being entered, and system interoperability were
enhance outcomes from rehabilitation: also priorities for physiotherapists. They particularly valued
how the exciteBCI app could support efficient and
https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023 | vol. 10 | e49702 | p. 11
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR REHABILITATION AND ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES Alder et al
comprehensive clinical record keeping and support handover Together, these factors supported people with stroke to work
between therapists: at intensities and volumes beyond what they would normally
achieve during rehabilitation. This supported substantial gains
I would think about a lot of these different parameters,
in balance and walking and, in turn, built self-efficacy:
but I might not be as explicit about them in my
notetaking [...] this is way more thorough[...] I felt a sense of achievement you know, and that’s
structured[...] easy to follow, easy to pick up on for what’s important, I’m still making progress. [Jake,
next time[...] and so much quicker. [Megan, Age 44, PwS, 3-wk program]
Physiotherapist, Sprint cycle 1] These findings illustrate that both people with stroke and
Physiotherapists identified the challenges associated with the physiotherapists discovered a number of features within the app
use of clinical terminology and language, calling for app features that support fundamental rehabilitation principles.
such as icons and pop-up definitions, which would support users
Theme 3: It Is a Tool, Not a Therapist
to have a clear understanding of key terms:
Participants with stroke emphasized that developing a trusted
Accuracy? so I’ve got large target, small target, wide
relationship with their therapist was fundamental to their
path, small path [...] so path I presume means width?
rehabilitative journey. They discussed ways in which the app
[...] I think photos or icons is a really good thing to
might support or disrupt this relationship. Participants in phase
just clarify stuff- probably more than words.[Megan,
1 raised the possibility that the app could disrupt the therapeutic
Physiotherapist, Sprint cycle 1]
relationship:
Most physiotherapists also described the need for prior hands-on
[...]Physically having the device and therapist there
training opportunities led by an experienced clinical expert,
complicates the relationship...so the therapist really
specifically addressing the rehabilitation approach, device
needs to make sure their cues show engagement and
set-up, and troubleshooting. This was deemed essential to
interest[...] there is a risk here. [Thonia, Lived
support the successful uptake of the technology in rehabilitation.
experience researcher]
In addition, they recommended incorporating training and
troubleshooting videos directly into the app. While those who participated in the 3-week program did not
highlight the same concern, all participants stressed that the app
Theme 2: Getting the Most Out of Rehab
was a therapeutic tool that should not be viewed as a substitute
People with stroke and physiotherapists described the ways in for the therapist:
which the exciteBCI, and in particular the app, could support
[...] if you feel I handed over the therapy session to
people with stroke to engage in more intensive and challenging
this [app] and I've cognitively left the building, then
rehabilitation at higher doses. Participants valued the way
that is disastrous, to our relationship and their
exciteBCI supported people with stroke to work hard. This was
treatment. If I'm not engaged, why would they want
achieved in multiple ways. First, the app enabled
to be [Jude, Physiotherapist, Sprint cycle 3]
physiotherapists to design specific and challenging rehabilitation
programs for patients: Most participants indicated that they would be happy to use the
app independently; however, the majority indicated a preference
It just was a really nice, structured way of [...] finding for using the device with the physiotherapist present. They
that sweet spot to maintain challenge, but for the described how the physiotherapist offered guidance and
participants to feel they are making progress and all feedback about their performance and progress:
that hard work is paying off. [Gemma,
Physiotherapist, 3-wk program] So, if I'm not doing a sit to stand correctly [points at
app] then who is going to correct me? [...] I like the
Second, the task difficulty rating scales supported both people
feedback from the therapist, because at some point
with stroke and physiotherapists to judge the challenge of each
the quality of the movement does matter.[Lilly, Age
task and served as a prompt to work on more challenging tasks:
64, PwS, Sprint cycle 1]
[...]and the rating scale is really helpful too. You have Participants also described how the physiotherapist motivated
a bit more about what’s challenging for them and them to work harder by encouraging them to do their best work,
what’s not. Gives you a better starting point. [Zoe, while also understanding their personal limits in a way that the
Physiotherapist, Sprint cycle 2] app could not:
Third, the audiovisual cue that prompted the onset of movement
The physiotherapist can push you further. They can
compelled people with stroke to remain focused. By setting the
see that you can be pushed extra. Which is important
time of task practice, limiting the amount of rest, and promoting
[...] people get tired, aagh and ready to give up,
attention on the task, large volumes of rehabilitation were
whereas the therapist goes another 10-minutes. Helps
achieved:
you squeeze out that last little bit.[Bob, Age 84, PwS,
[...]I think the way that the system has been Sprint cycle 1]
constructed is quite focus oriented...It’s actually Consequently, some participants felt that the exciteBCI either
keeping the time [...] you get so much more in [the should not or could not be used without the support of a
session]. [Anni, Age 58, PwS, 3-wk program] physiotherapist. These findings illustrate that attention to the
https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023 | vol. 10 | e49702 | p. 12
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR REHABILITATION AND ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES Alder et al
impact of technology on the therapeutic relationship during both concerns, they were eager to offer suggestions to make it a
the design and implementation of rehabilitation technologies is viable option for independent use.
essential.
Theme 5: Do Not Make Me Look Different
Theme 4: Weighing up the Benefits Versus the Burden
Almost all participants emphasized how the social acceptability
While both people with stroke and physiotherapist participants of the device would influence their desire to use it. The need
saw the benefits and potential of exciteBCI, they also called for for a socially acceptable device design was less important in a
“real-world evidence” of effect, research-based evidence, or clinical setting or at home than if the device was being used in
endorsement from a trusted source: a public or social context:
[...] If I knew it was going to bring about a speedier It’s [the headset] not for glamour it’s for results [...]
recovery, I would be more likely to use it. [James, it’s the job it’s doing, reading the brain. Glamour
Age 74, PwS, Sprint cycle 2] doesn't matter, does it? If there’s certain areas of the
If my physio turned up with it, I wouldn’t mind at all. brain it can read, it’s got to work. It doesn’t matter
[Jenny, Age 67, PwS, Sprint cycle 2] what it looks like [...] not whilst you’re doing rehab.
You’re there for the rehab. [Lilly, Age 64, PwS,
Those who participated in the 3-week program drew on their
Sprint cycle 1]
own experiences of the intervention to generate real-world
evidence: Nevertheless, most participants called for a device which did
not draw attention to themselves or their disabilities:
When we visited French festival, I was helped up onto
the raised platform advertising electric cars [...] Many people find it difficult to approach you, when
Renault Twizy. I don’t think I was pressing down on you walk differently, or they treat you differently [...]
my husband’s hand as much, on ‘reaching’up, and So, you can understand why I would value a design
managed to squeeze myself into the car-space for a that doesn't make me look even more different than I
photo or two, [...] great! Extending my reach, even already do.[Jenny, 67 years; PwS, Sprint cycle 2]
just a wee bit, was brilliant. [Anni, Age 58, PwS, Participants posited that what constitutes a socially acceptable
3-wk program] device might also vary depending on a person’s gender, age,
Physiotherapists described how they would consider cost, client and culture. The length of time since their stroke diagnosis and
suitability, set-up time, workflow, and clinical effectiveness how much rehabilitation was prioritized in their daily lives also
when deciding whether to adopt the exciteBCI intervention: appeared to influence the participants’perspectives on whether
they would consider using the wearable device in their daily
I would need to know it was going to make a really lives:
big difference to invest in purchasing it and have a
fair amount of clients I could use it with. [...] it’s Initially I would [during inpatient rehab] [...] you’re
difficult without actually using it in clinical practice ready to take anything that you think will help but
as to know sort of who would really benefit.[Megan, what shifts the balance of that is I think it’s about -
Physiotherapist, Sprint cycle 1] I’m more progressed now and more - I want people
to see me where I’m at now. [James, Age 74, PwS,
While participants with stroke called for the device to be
Sprint cycle 2]
integrated into their rehabilitation as early after stroke as
possible, some physiotherapists saw a tension between the set-up Concerns about the social acceptability of the device largely
time of both the headset and the app and the decision to pertained to the esthetics of the headset and
implement the device in different clinical contexts: electroencephalography gel. The current headset design was
viewed as unacceptable for wearing-out in public, where social
I don’t think[…] you’d use it on an acute ward[...] I perceptions play a role. Minimizing and concealing the device
think it takes too much time [...] based on how much with clothing or incorporating it into something that looked
time[...] physios have based in my experience[...] I familiar and fits with everyday life, such as a hat or headphones,
just think time and all the equipment there and was seen as an important future design consideration.
everything else that goes on. I don’t, can’t see it Participants from phase 1 perceived there to be no issue with
working. In a rehab ward maybe. Definitely the use of electroencephalography gel in a rehabilitation
outpatients.[Jude, Physiotherapist, Sprint cycle 3] environment. While participants in the 3-week program
When discussing use of the device in the home, participants described the inconvenience of repeated gel use and its impact
with stroke and physiotherapists from phase 1 (single session) outside of the rehabilitation context, they perceived that the
viewed the headset as a potential barrier to adopting the device. benefits they experienced from the intervention outweighed this
This was mainly due to the perceived difficulty of setting it up inconvenience. In contrast, participants perceived the electrical
independently for those with upper limb disability and the need stimulator to be more acceptable. It was noted that the electrical
for gel to be inserted into the electroencephalography electrodes stimulator and its neoprene housing resembled sports braces
while wearing the headset. The set-up of the electrical stimulator which were considered socially acceptable and in common use.
and app was not viewed in the same light. While people with
stroke who participated in the 3-week program expressed similar
https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023 | vol. 10 | e49702 | p. 13
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR REHABILITATION AND ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES Alder et al
Discussion relationship, and (2) therapists and health care educators should
consider how rehabilitation technologies can be used to support
Principal Findings
person-centered rehabilitation, ensuring that the therapeutic
This study applied a user-centered design approach to explore relationship is preserved and developed throughout the
the perspectives and experiences of people with stroke and rehabilitation process.
physiotherapists when engaging with exciteBCI rehabilitation
Considerations for Social Acceptability in Rehabilitation
technology and how well it fits within a stroke rehabilitation
Technology Design
context. The results support the acceptability of the exciteBCI
intervention and its “fit” with clinical practice and will inform The findings from the “Don’t make me look different” theme
the requirements for future device development. These findings clearly articulate that people with stroke place weight on the
also provide key insights that can inform the design and esthetics and social acceptability of a rehabilitation technology
implementation of rehabilitation technologies more broadly. device when considering whether to use it. Social acceptability
may be particularly important in the design of head-mounted
Technology and the Therapeutic Relationship
wearable devices [87-89]. This is an important finding given
This study highlights the importance of considering the impact that social acceptability is often a lesser priority in the
of technology on the therapeutic relationship between patients rehabilitation technology development process. Defining the
and therapists. The therapeutic relationship refers to the target user population and understanding their device
relational process that takes place during clinical interactions requirements early in the design and development process may
and is considered a critical aspect of rehabilitation by both resolve acceptability issues and minimize the need for significant
patients and therapists [75-77]. Qualitative research in design changes later in the process [90]. This approach has the
neurorehabilitation indicates that positive therapeutic potential to not only mitigate issues of acceptability and usability
relationships are pivotal in supporting patient engagement, but also reduce the impact on development time and costs, while
positive patient experiences, and in enhancing patient outcomes simultaneously increasing the chances of successful adoption
[78,79]. The “It is a tool, not a therapist” theme identified that and sustained use of the technology [45,91]. Importantly, our
both people with stroke and physiotherapists who participated findings indicate that the need for a socially acceptable device
in the phase 1 single usability sessions cautioned that the design is dependent on the context in which the technology is
exciteBCI app could be disruptive to the therapeutic relationship. to be used. Therefore, device developers should be cognizant
Similar concerns have been raised in other health technology of the use context when prioritizing social acceptability. Given
domains, citing disruptions of the therapeutic relationship as a the shift in rehabilitation services to the community [92] and
potential barrier to technology adoption [80-83]. In contrast, in supported self-management programs [93], social acceptability
this study, participants who used the exciteBCI app over for both users and bystanders [87,89] is likely to be a pivotal
multiple sessions in phase 2 highlighted how the technology consideration in the design of rehabilitation technologies in the
could be successfully integrated into clinical interactions to future.
support and enhance the therapeutic relationship. The
User Testing in a Sustained Way
participants described how using the rating scales within the
exciteBCI app facilitated a shared understanding of the User-centered design approaches are increasingly being
rehabilitative challenge, allowing the person with stroke to take encouraged to inform health technology design and development
control of their rehabilitation and identify opportunities for [45,94]. Yet much of the methodological literature describes
progressing rehabilitation challenge in collaboration with the single-session usability evaluation, where novice users’
physiotherapist. However, this required the physiotherapist and perceptions and experiences of the technology inform the next
the person with stroke to be mindful of the role of the iteration [95]. While this approach can highlight “entry-level”
technology, its value, and limitations, and to use it purposefully usability issues or novice user frustrations that can often be
and appropriately. quick fixes, it is unlikely to identify fundamental usability and
acceptability issues or the sources of frustrations that could be
The current findings combined with previous literature
barriers to the sustained use of the technology [59,95]. This is
emphasize how crucial it is to take the patient, therapist, and
an important limitation when using user-centered design
technology triad into account when designing and implementing
methods for the development of rehabilitation technologies
rehabilitation technology. While research in telehealth has
intended for sustained use. To ensure that we captured design
attended to the influence of technology on the therapeutic
requirements that support both the adoption and sustained use
relationship over time and its implications for usability [84-86],
of the exciteBCI technology, in addition to the iterative single
the same attention has not been given to the development of
usability evaluation sessions, we conducted “near-live” usability
rehabilitation technology devices. Understanding the influence
testing over a 3-week period. This approach allowed us to
of technology on clinical interactions and workflow, and the
investigate the technology’s “fit” with a program of
ways in which these change over time, is critical. Being attuned
rehabilitation. Users’ long-term experiences and the ways in
to the impact rehabilitation technologies have on therapeutic
which the device’s usability and acceptability evolved over time
relationships requires a deep understanding of the role of the
were elucidated.
therapist and patient and the rationale for the technology. This
knowledge should be applied in two ways: (1) designers and An important finding was that user perspectives and usability
developers should explicitly consider how the design of the priorities shifted with sustained use of the exciteBCI technology.
technology can support and strengthen the therapeutic Long-term users were less concerned with the practicalities of
https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023 | vol. 10 | e49702 | p. 14
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR REHABILITATION AND ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES Alder et al
the technology, such as the ease of setting up the exciteBCI app were in the chronic stage of stroke (2-19 y since stroke onset),
and headset. While these inconveniences were noted, they were and the physiotherapists worked in an outpatient rehabilitation
apparently offset by the benefits users experienced from the or community setting. While participants reflected on their prior
intervention itself. It appeared that from engaging in sustained lived experiences of inpatient rehabilitation closer to the onset
use, they obtained the “real-world evidence” in support of the of their stroke, when their stroke symptoms were more severe,
technology which was desired by participants in phase 1. or when physiotherapists worked in an inpatient setting, future
Long-term users also did not highlight that the technology might user testing should include participants who are currently
disrupt therapeutic relationships. Instead, they were more undergoing or providing inpatient rehabilitation. This will
focused on the pleasure they had from “getting the most out of determine whether their experiences align with or differ from
rehab,” the increase in self-efficacy they experienced, and the the device features described in this study and help to understand
gains they made when the technology augmented the how well it fits in an inpatient rehabilitation setting. In phase
rehabilitation process. Similar findings have been previously 1, while the physiotherapists had extensive experience with the
reported in the literature. When meaningful connections are patient cohort and their associated clinical presentation, the
formed with technology over time, the pleasure derived from model used during the usability evaluation was not an individual
its use acquires more weight, and practical limitations become with stroke. This may have influenced the usability results. Only
less significant [96]. A single-session usability assessment may 1 physiotherapist (GA) participated in the “near-live” 3-week
not always foresee future satisfaction with the technology since program. Future research should explore usability testing over
it may be evaluating expectations rather than user experience periods of time with a range of different users. Another potential
[97]. In the context of this study, it is critical to remember that limitation of the study design was that it did not capture the
the user experience includes not only the technology itself, but initial expectations of phase 2 long-term users. Therefore, we
also the experience gained from participating in the were unable to interpret how their initial expectations may have
rehabilitation process, and that this experience occurs within shaped their experiences of using exciteBCI, and whether their
the context of a therapeutic relationship. As a result, explicitly expectations were confirmed or disregarded at the end of the
designing technology to support both meaningful rehabilitation program.
and best practice from the physiotherapist to establish and
Conclusions
nurture a therapeutic relationship is paramount.
This study presented an iterative user-centered design approach
Our findings regarding the sustained use of exciteBCI
supported by a qualitative descriptive methodology exploring
technology also provide important guidance for its eventual
users’perspectives and experiences of exciteBCI, a complex
implementation in clinical practice. Current models for
neuromodulatory rehabilitative technology designed to augment
implementing rehabilitation technologies often rely on
locomotor rehabilitation for people with stroke. The 5
instructional booklets and training and accreditation packages,
interrelated themes generated from the analysis revealed that
usually provided by the technology manufacturer. While these
overall exciteBCI was perceived and experienced positively by
strategies are likely to support the adoption of rehabilitation
people with stroke and physiotherapists and viewed as
technology, they are less likely to support sustained use.
technology that could be implemented in a rehabilitation context.
Implementation science literature emphasizes the importance
These findings provide important insights pertinent to the
of strategies, such as identifying factors and barriers to sustained
broader field of rehabilitation technology design,
use, the use of clinical champions on site, and the use of
implementation, and sustained use. Notably, these findings
behavior change strategies to ensure therapists are supported in
highlight that rehabilitation technology design should (1)
practice change [98-100].
consider ways to support and enhance the therapeutic
Limitations of the Study relationship; (2) recognize that social acceptability is a design
imperative, but its significance varies depending on the use
This study adopted a rigorous approach to qualitative research;
context; and (3) that there is merit in using research design
however, it is important to acknowledge that we used a
methods that explore device usability within the context of
convenience sampling method in this study; all participants
sustained use.
Acknowledgments
This research was partly funded by Callaghan Innovation (C Prize Challenge finalists 2017) and the Medical Technology Centre
of Research Excellence.
We gratefully acknowledge the time given to this study by the research participants. Without their willingness, this work would
not have been possible. We thank Exsurgo Limited for their contributions to the technology hardware and software development
of the exciteBCI device and for supplying exciteBCI illustrations. We thank Dr Suzie Mudge for interviewing GA in phase 2 of
the data collection.
https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023 | vol. 10 | e49702 | p. 15
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR REHABILITATION AND ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES Alder et al
Data Availability
The data sets generated and analyzed during this study are not publicly available because of ethical approval requirements, which
do not permit data sharing. Data may be obtained from the corresponding author upon reasonable request with the approval of
the relevant ethics committee.
Authors' Contributions
GA, NS and DT conceptualized the study. GA, NS, DT, and GT designed the methodology, and DT and GA acquired ethical
approval. NS, DT, UR, GA, SO, and IKN acquired funding, and GA performed project administration. GA, NS, TB, GT, UR,
and SO contributed to data collection. UR and IKN were responsible for the technology. Data analysis was performed by GA
and reviewed by NS and GT. Supervision was performed by NS and DT. The original draft was written by GA and NS, and edited
by SO. All authors reviewed the submitted manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest
None declared.
Multimedia Appendix 1
Indicative interview questions.
[DOCX File , 29 KB-Multimedia Appendix 1]
References
1. Feigin VL, Brainin M, Norrving B, Martins S, Sacco RL, Hacke W, et al. World stroke organization (WSO): global stroke
fact sheet 2022. Int J Stroke. 2022 Jan;17(1):18-29 [doi: 10.1177/17474930211065917] [Medline: 34986727]
2. Donkor ES. Stroke in the 21 century: a snapshot of the burden, epidemiology, and quality of life. Stroke Res Treat. 2018
Nov 27;2018:3238165 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1155/2018/3238165] [Medline: 30598741]
3. Duncan PW, Zorowitz R, Bates B, Choi JY, Glasberg JJ, Graham GD, et al. Management of adult stroke rehabilitation
care: a clinical practice guideline. Stroke. 2005 Sep;36(9):e100-e143 [doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000180861.54180.FF] [Medline:
16120836]
4. Veerbeek JM, Kwakkel G, van Wegen EE, Ket JC, Heymans MW. Early prediction of outcome of activities of daily living
after stroke: a systematic review. Stroke. 2011 May;42(5):1482-1488 [doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.604090] [Medline:
21474812]
5. Steigenberger J. Some theory towards a stringent definition of ‘locomotion’. Multibody Syst Dyn. 2011 Jan 28;26(1):81-90
[doi: 10.1007/s11044-011-9245-z]
6. Perry J, Garrett M, Gronley JK, Mulroy SJ. Classification of walking handicap in the stroke population. Stroke. 1995
Jun;26(6):982-989 [doi: 10.1161/01.str.26.6.982] [Medline: 7762050]
7. Hill K, Ellis P, Bernhardt J, Maggs P, Hull S. Balance and mobility outcomes for stroke patients: a comprehensive audit.
Aust J Physiother. 1997;43(3):173-180 [doi: 10.1016/s0004-9514(14)60408-6] [Medline: 11676685]
8. Lohse KR, Lang CE, Boyd LA. Is more better? Using metadata to explore dose-response relationships in stroke rehabilitation.
Stroke. 2014 Jul;45(7):2053-2058 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.004695] [Medline: 24867924]
9. Veerbeek JM, van Wegen E, van Peppen R, van der Wees PJ, Hendriks E, Rietberg M, et al. What is the evidence for
physical therapy poststroke? A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 4;9(2):e87987 [FREE Full text]
[doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087987] [Medline: 24505342]
10. Schneider EJ, Lannin NA, Ada L, Schmidt J. Increasing the amount of usual rehabilitation improves activity after stroke:
a systematic review. J Physiother. 2016 Oct;62(4):182-187 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/j.jphys.2016.08.006] [Medline:
27637769]
11. French B, Thomas LH, Coupe J, McMahon NE, Connell L, Harrison J, et al. Repetitive task training for improving functional
ability after stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016 Nov 14;11(11):CD006073 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD006073.pub3] [Medline: 27841442]
12. English C, Hillier SL, Lynch EA. Circuit class therapy for improving mobility after stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2017 Jun 02;6(6):CD007513 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD007513.pub3] [Medline: 28573757]
13. Mehrholz J, Thomas S, Elsner B. Treadmill training and body weight support for walking after stroke. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2017 Aug 17;8(8):CD002840 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD002840.pub4] [Medline: 28815562]
14. Nascimento LR, Boening A, Galli A, Polese JC, Ada L. Treadmill walking improves walking speed and distance in
ambulatory people after stroke and is not inferior to overground walking: a systematic review. J Physiother. 2021
Apr;67(2):95-104 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/j.jphys.2021.02.014] [Medline: 33744188]
15. Bernhardt J, Chan J, Nicola I, Collier JM. Little therapy, little physical activity: rehabilitation within the first 14 days of
organized stroke unit care. J Rehabil Med. 2007 Jan;39(1):43-48 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2340/16501977-0013] [Medline:
17225037]
https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023 | vol. 10 | e49702 | p. 16
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR REHABILITATION AND ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES Alder et al
16. Bernhardt J, Dewey H, Thrift A, Donnan G. Inactive and alone: physical activity within the first 14 days of acute stroke
unit care. Stroke. 2004 Apr;35(4):1005-1009 [doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000120727.40792.40] [Medline: 14988574]
17. Hayward KS, Brauer SG. Dose of arm activity training during acute and subacute rehabilitation post stroke: a systematic
review of the literature. Clin Rehabil. 2015 Dec;29(12):1234-1243 [doi: 10.1177/0269215514565395] [Medline: 25568073]
18. Kaur G, English C, Hillier S. How physically active are people with stroke in physiotherapy sessions aimed at improving
motor function? A systematic review. Stroke Res Treat. ;2012:820673 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1155/2012/820673]
[Medline: 22567542]
19. McNaughton H, DeJong G, Smout RJ, Melvin JL, Brandstater M. A comparison of stroke rehabilitation practice and
outcomes between New Zealand and United States facilities. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2005 Dec;86(12 Suppl 2):S115-S120
[doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2005.08.115] [Medline: 16373146]
20. McLaren R, Signal N, Lord S, Taylor S, Henderson J, Taylor D. The volume and timing of upper limb movement in acute
stroke rehabilitation: still room for improvement. Disabil Rehabil. 2020 Nov;42(22):3237-3242 [doi:
10.1080/09638288.2019.1590471] [Medline: 30951402]
21. Pereira S, Mehta S, McIntyre A, Lobo L, Teasell RW. Functional electrical stimulation for improving gait in persons with
chronic stroke. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2012;19(6):491-498 [doi: 10.1310/tsr1906-491] [Medline: 23192714]
22. Howlett OA, Lannin NA, Ada L, McKinstry C. Functional electrical stimulation improves activity after stroke: a systematic
review with meta-analysis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2015 May;96(5):934-943 [doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2015.01.013] [Medline:
25634620]
23. Mehrholz J, Thomas S, Werner C, Kugler J, Pohl M, Elsner B. Electromechanical-assisted training for walking after stroke.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017 May 10;5(5):CD006185 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006185.pub4]
[Medline: 28488268]
24. Rodrigues-Baroni JM, Nascimento LR, Ada L, Teixeira-Salmela LF. Walking training associated with virtual reality-based
training increases walking speed of individuals with chronic stroke: systematic review with meta-analysis. Braz J Phys
Ther. 2014;18(6):502-512 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1590/bjpt-rbf.2014.0062] [Medline: 25590442]
25. Corbetta D, Imeri F, Gatti R. Rehabilitation that incorporates virtual reality is more effective than standard rehabilitation
for improving walking speed, balance and mobility after stroke: a systematic review. J Physiother. 2015 Jul;61(3):117-124
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/j.jphys.2015.05.017] [Medline: 26093805]
26. Lynch EA, Jones TM, Simpson DB, Fini NA, Kuys S, Borschmann K, et al. Activity monitors for increasing physical
activity in adult stroke survivors. Stroke. 2019 Jan;50(1):e4-e5 [doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.118.023088] [Medline:
30580734]
27. Turchetti G, Vitiello N, Trieste L, Romiti S, Geisler E, Micera S. Why effectiveness of robot-mediated neurorehabilitation
does not necessarily influence its adoption. IEEE Rev Biomed Eng. 2014;7:143-153 [doi: 10.1109/RBME.2014.2300234]
[Medline: 24803207]
28. Langan J, Subryan H, Nwogu I, Cavuoto L. Reported use of technology in stroke rehabilitation by physical and occupational
therapists. Disabil Rehabil Assist Technol. 2018 Oct;13(7):641-647 [doi: 10.1080/17483107.2017.1362043] [Medline:
28812386]
29. Liu L, Miguel Cruz A, Rios Rincon A, Buttar V, Ranson Q, Goertzen D. What factors determine therapists' acceptance of
new technologies for rehabilitation – a study using the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT).
Disabil Rehabil. 2015;37(5):447-455 [doi: 10.3109/09638288.2014.923529] [Medline: 24901351]
30. Matthew-Maich N, Harris L, Ploeg J, Markle-Reid M, Valaitis R, Ibrahim S, et al. Designing, implementing, and evaluating
mobile health technologies for managing chronic conditions in older adults: a scoping review. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2016
Jun 09;4(2):e29 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/mhealth.5127] [Medline: 27282195]
31. Riek LD. Healthcare robotics. Commun ACM. 2017 Oct 24;60(11):68-78 [doi: 10.1145/3127874]
32. Chua KS, Kuah CW. Innovating with rehabilitation technology in the real world: promises, potentials, and perspectives.
Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2017 Oct;96(10 Suppl 1):S150-S156 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1097/PHM.0000000000000799]
[Medline: 28708632]
33. Cano Porras D, Sharon H, Inzelberg R, Ziv-Ner Y, Zeilig G, Plotnik M. Advanced virtual reality-based rehabilitation of
balance and gait in clinical practice. Ther Adv Chronic Dis. 2019 Aug 23;10:2040622319868379 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1177/2040622319868379] [Medline: 31489154]
34. Holloway C, Dawes H. Disrupting the world of disability: the next generation of assistive technologies and rehabilitation
practices. Healthc Technol Lett. 2016 Dec 07;3(4):254-256 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1049/htl.2016.0087] [Medline:
28008360]
35. Kerr A, Smith M, Reid L, Baillie L. Adoption of stroke rehabilitation technologies by the user community: qualitative
study. JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol. 2018 Aug 17;5(2):e15 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/rehab.9219] [Medline: 30120086]
36. Mawson S, Nasr N, Parker J, Zheng H, Davies R, Mountain G. Developing a personalised self-management system for
post stroke rehabilitation; utilising a user-centred design methodology. Disabil Rehabil Assist Technol. 2014 Nov;9(6):521-528
[doi: 10.3109/17483107.2013.840863] [Medline: 24131371]
https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023 | vol. 10 | e49702 | p. 17
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR REHABILITATION AND ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES Alder et al
37. Lobo EH, Frølich A, Rasmussen LJ, Livingston PM, Grundy J, Abdelrazek M, et al. Understanding the methodological
issues and solutions in the research design of stroke caregiving technology. Front Public Health. 2021 Apr 16;9:647249
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.647249] [Medline: 33937175]
38. ISO 9241-210:2019 Ergonomics of human-system interaction Part 210: human-centred design for interactive systems.
International Organization for Standardization. 2019. URL: https://www.iso.org/standard/77520.html[accessed 2022-05-12]
39. De Vito Dabbs A, Myers BA, Mc Curry KR, Dunbar-Jacob J, Hawkins RP, Begey A, et al. User-centered design and
interactive health technologies for patients. Comput Inform Nurs. 2009;27(3):175-183 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1097/NCN.0b013e31819f7c7c] [Medline: 19411947]
40. Rossini PM, Burke D, Chen R, Cohen LG, Daskalakis Z, Di Iorio R, et al. Non-invasive electrical and magnetic stimulation
of the brain, spinal cord, roots and peripheral nerves: basic principles and procedures for routine clinical and research
application. An updated report from an I.F.C.N. Committee. Clin Neurophysiol. 2015 Jun;126(6):1071-1107 [FREE Full
text] [doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2015.02.001] [Medline: 25797650]
41. Wessel MJ, Zimerman M, Hummel FC. Non-invasive brain stimulation: an interventional tool for enhancing behavioral
training after stroke. Front Hum Neurosci. 2015 May 15;9:265 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2015.00265] [Medline:
26029083]
42. Ayache SS, Farhat WH, Zouari HG, Hosseini H, Mylius V, Lefaucheur JP. Stroke rehabilitation using noninvasive cortical
stimulation: motor deficit. Expert Rev Neurother. 2012 Aug 09;12(8):949-972 [doi: 10.1586/ern.12.83] [Medline: 23002939]
43. Vaz PG, Salazar AP, Stein C, Marchese RR, Lukrafka JL, Plentz RD, et al. Noninvasive brain stimulation combined with
other therapies improves gait speed after stroke: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2019 Apr
08;26(3):201-213 [doi: 10.1080/10749357.2019.1565696] [Medline: 30735104]
44. Tien HH, Liu WY, Chen YL, Wu YC, Lien HY. Transcranial direct current stimulation for improving ambulation after
stroke: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Rehabil Res. 2020 Dec;43(4):299-309 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1097/MRR.0000000000000427] [Medline: 32675686]
45. Jankowski N, Schönijahn L, Salchow C, Ivanova E, Wahl M. User-centred design as an important component of technological
development. Curr Dir Biomed Eng. 2017;3(1):69-73 [doi: 10.1515/cdbme-2017-0015]
46. Mrachacz-Kersting N, Kristensen SR, Niazi IK, Farina D. Precise temporal association between cortical potentials evoked
by motor imagination and afference induces cortical plasticity. J Physiol. 2012 Apr 01;590(7):1669-1682 [FREE Full text]
[doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2011.222851] [Medline: 22250210]
47. Niazi IK, Mrachacz-Kersting N, Jiang N, Dremstrup K, Farina D. Peripheral electrical stimulation triggered by self-paced
detection of motor intention enhances motor evoked potentials. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. 2012 Jul;20(4):595-604
[doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2012.2194309] [Medline: 22547461]
48. Olsen S, Signal N, Niazi IK, Christensen T, Jochumsen M, Taylor D. Paired associative stimulation delivered by pairing
movement-related cortical potentials with peripheral electrical stimulation: an investigation of the duration of neuromodulatory
effects. Neuromodulation. 2018 Jun;21(4):362-367 [doi: 10.1111/ner.12616] [Medline: 28580648]
49. Olsen S, Signal N, Niazi IK, Rashid U, Alder G, Mawston G, et al. Peripheral electrical stimulation paired with
movement-related cortical potentials improves isometric muscle strength and voluntary activation following stroke. Front
Hum Neurosci. 2020 May 15;14:156 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2020.00156] [Medline: 32499686]
50. Jochumsen M, Cremoux S, Robinault L, Lauber J, Arceo JC, Navid MS, et al. Investigation of optimal afferent feedback
modality for inducing neural plasticity with a self-paced brain-computer interface. Sensors (Basel). 2018 Nov 03;18(11):3761
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.3390/s18113761] [Medline: 30400325]
51. Jochumsen M, Navid MS, Nedergaard RW, Signal N, Rashid U, Hassan A, et al. Self-paced online vs. cue-based offline
brain-computer interfaces for inducing neural plasticity. Brain Sci. 2019 Jun 01;9(6):127 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.3390/brainsci9060127] [Medline: 31159454]
52. Jochumsen M, Navid MS, Rashid U, Haavik H, Niazi IK. EMG- versus EEG-triggered electrical stimulation for inducing
corticospinal plasticity. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. 2019 Sep;27(9):1901-1908 [doi: 10.1109/tnsre.2019.2932104]
53. Alder G, Signal N, Vandal AC, Olsen S, Jochumsen M, Niazi IK, et al. Investigating the intervention parameters of
endogenous paired associative stimulation (ePAS). Brain Sci. 2021 Feb 12;11(2):224 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.3390/brainsci11020224] [Medline: 33673171]
54. Niazi IK, Navid MS, Rashid U, Amjad I, Olsen S, Haavik H, et al. Associative cued asynchronous BCI induces cortical
plasticity in stroke patients. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2022 May 30;9(5):722-733 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1002/acn3.51551]
[Medline: 35488791]
55. Olsen SA. Rewiring the brain after stroke: a novel neuromodulatory intervention to improve neuromuscular control.
Auckland University of Technology. 2019. URL: http:///C:/Users/HP/Downloads/OlsenS.pdf[accessed 2023-11-16]
56. Luker J, Lynch E, Bernhardsson S, Bennett L, Bernhardt J. Stroke survivors' experiences of physical rehabilitation: a
systematic review of qualitative studies. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2015 Sep;96(9):1698-1708.e10 [doi:
10.1016/j.apmr.2015.03.017] [Medline: 25847387]
57. Signal N, McPherson K, Lewis G, Kayes N, Saywell N, Mudge S, et al. What influences acceptability and engagement
with a high intensity exercise programme for people with stroke? A qualitative descriptive study. NeuroRehabilitation.
2016 Oct 14;39(4):507-517 [doi: 10.3233/nre-161382]
https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023 | vol. 10 | e49702 | p. 18
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR REHABILITATION AND ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES Alder et al
58. C Prize finalists' journal. CallaghanInnovation. 2017. URL: https://www.callaghaninnovation.govt.nz/sites/all/files/
cprize-2017-team-notebooks-web.pdf[accessed 2022-11-01]
59. Hornbæk K. Current practice in measuring usability: challenges to usability studies and research. Int J Hum Comput Stud.
2006 Feb;64(2):79-102 [doi: 10.1016/j.ijhcs.2005.06.002]
60. Li AC, Kannry JL, Kushniruk A, Chrimes D, McGinn TG, Edonyabo D, et al. Integrating usability testing and think-aloud
protocol analysis with "near-live" clinical simulations in evaluating clinical decision support. Int J Med Inform. 2012
Nov;81(11):761-772 [doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2012.02.009] [Medline: 22456088]
61. Arsand E, Demiris G. User-centered methods for designing patient-centric self-help tools. Inform Health Soc Care. 2008
Sep;33(3):158-169 [doi: 10.1080/17538150802457562] [Medline: 18850399]
62. Sandelowski M. Whatever happened to qualitative description? Res Nurs Health. 2000 Aug;23(4):334-340 [doi:
10.1002/1098-240x(200008)23:4<334::aid-nur9>3.0.co;2-g] [Medline: 10940958]
63. Nielsen J. Estimating the number of subjects needed for a thinking aloud test. Int J Hum Comput Stud. 1994
Sep;41(3):385-397 [doi: 10.1006/ijhc.1994.1065]
64. Virzi RA. Refining the test phase of usability evaluation: how many subjects is enough? Hum Factors. 2016 Nov
23;34(4):457-468 [doi: 10.1177/001872089203400407]
65. Hill K, Denisenko S, Miller K, Clements T, Batchelor F, Morgan P. Clinical Outcome Measurement in Adult Neurological
Physiotherapy. Melbourne, Australia. Australian Physiotherapy Association, National Neurology Group; 2010.
66. Living clinical guidelines for stroke management. Stroke Foundation. URL: https://informme.org.au/Guidelines/
Clinical-Guidelines-for-Stroke-Management[accessed 2023-01-15]
67. Hebert D, Lindsay MP, McIntyre A, Kirton A, Rumney PG, Bagg S, et al. Canadian stroke best practice recommendations:
stroke rehabilitation practice guidelines, update 2015. Int J Stroke. 2016 Jun;11(4):459-484 [doi: 10.1177/1747493016643553]
[Medline: 27079654]
68. Winstein CJ, Stein J, Arena R, Bates B, Cherney LR, Cramer SC, et al. Guidelines for adult stroke rehabilitation and
recovery: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association.
Stroke. 2016 Jun;47(6):e98-169 [doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000098] [Medline: 27145936]
69. Maier M, Ballester BR, Verschure PF. Principles of neurorehabilitation after stroke based on motor learning and brain
plasticity mechanisms. Front Syst Neurosci. 2019 Dec 17;13:74 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2019.00074] [Medline:
31920570]
70. NVivo (Version 12). Lumivero. URL: https://www.qsrinternational.com/nvivo-qualitative-data-analysis-software/home
[accessed 2023-01-10]
71. Hsieh HF, Shannon SE. Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. Qual Health Res. 2005 Nov;15(9):1277-1288
[doi: 10.1177/1049732305276687] [Medline: 16204405]
72. Kondracki NL, Wellman NS, Amundson DR. Content analysis: review of methods and their applications in nutrition
education. J Nutr Educ Behav. 2002 Jul;34(4):224-230 [doi: 10.1016/s1499-4046(06)60097-3] [Medline: 12217266]
73. Braun V. Successful Qualitative Research: A Practical Guide for Beginners. Thousand Oaks, CA. SAGE Publications Ltd;
2013.
74. Mehrholz J, Wagner K, Rutte K, Meissner D, Pohl M. Predictive validity and responsiveness of the functional ambulation
category in hemiparetic patients after stroke. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2007 Oct;88(10):1314-1319 [doi:
10.1016/j.apmr.2007.06.764] [Medline: 17908575]
75. Rowlands L, Coetzer R, Turnbull OH. Building the bond: predictors of the alliance in neurorehabilitation. NeuroRehabilitation.
2020 May 21;46(3):271-285 [doi: 10.3233/nre-193005]
76. Lawton M, Haddock G, Conroy P, Sage K. Therapeutic alliances in stroke rehabilitation: a meta-ethnography. Arch Phys
Med Rehabil. 2016 Nov;97(11):1979-1993 [doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2016.03.031] [Medline: 27137094]
77. Martín-Sanz MB, Salazar-de-la-Guerra RM, Cuenca-Zaldivar JN, Salcedo-Perez-Juana M, Garcia-Bravo C, Palacios-Ceña
D. Person-centred care in individuals with stroke: a qualitative study using in-depth interviews. Ann Med. 2022 Dec
05;54(1):2167-2180 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1080/07853890.2022.2105393] [Medline: 35930376]
78. Terry G, Kayes N. Person centered care in neurorehabilitation: a secondary analysis. Disabil Rehabil. 2020 Aug
29;42(16):2334-2343 [doi: 10.1080/09638288.2018.1561952] [Medline: 30696295]
79. Kayes NM, Mcpherson K, Kersten P. Therapeutic connection in neurorehabilitation: theory, evidence and practice. In:
Evidence-Based Neurology: Management of Neurological Disorders. Hoboken, NJ. John Wiley & Sons; 2015.
80. Giunti G, Kool J, Rivera Romero O, Dorronzoro Zubiete E. Exploring the specific needs of persons with multiple sclerosis
for mHealth solutions for physical activity: mixed-methods study. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2018 Feb 09;6(2):e37 [FREE
Full text] [doi: 10.2196/mhealth.8996] [Medline: 29426814]
81. Pearce C, Dwan K, Arnold M, Phillips C, Trumble S. Doctor, patient and computer--a framework for the new consultation.
Int J Med Inform. 2009 Jan;78(1):32-38 [doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2008.07.002] [Medline: 18752989]
82. Booth N, Robinson P, Kohannejad J. Identification of high-quality consultation practice in primary care: the effects of
computer use on doctor-patient rapport. Inform Prim Care. 2004;12(2):75-83 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.14236/jhi.v12i2.111]
[Medline: 15319059]
https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023 | vol. 10 | e49702 | p. 19
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR REHABILITATION AND ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES Alder et al
83. Rortvedt D, Jacobs K. Perspectives on the use of a telehealth service-delivery model as a component of school-based
occupational therapy practice: designing a user-experience. Work. 2019 Feb 07;62(1):125-131 [doi: 10.3233/wor-182847]
84. Rietdijk R, Power E, Attard M, Togher L. Acceptability of telehealth-delivered rehabilitation: experiences and perspectives
of people with traumatic brain injury and their carers. J Telemed Telecare. 2020 May 28;28(2):122-134 [doi:
10.1177/1357633x20923824]
85. Sucala M, Schnur JB, Constantino MJ, Miller SJ, Brackman EH, Montgomery GH. The therapeutic relationship in e-therapy
for mental health: a systematic review. J Med Internet Res. 2012 Aug 02;14(4):e110 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/jmir.2084]
[Medline: 22858538]
86. Aafjes-van Doorn K, Békés V, Prout TA. Grappling with our therapeutic relationship and professional self-doubt during
COVID-19: will we use video therapy again? Counsel Psychol Q. 2020 Jun 03;34(3-4):473-484 [doi:
10.1080/09515070.2020.1773404]
87. Schwind V, Reinhardt R, Rzayev R, Henze N, Wolf K. Virtual reality on the go?: a study on social acceptance of VR
glasses. In: Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and
Services Adjunct. 2018 Presented at: MobileHCI '18; September 3-6, 2018; Barcelona, Spain [doi: 10.1145/3236112.3236127]
88. Sehrt J, Braams B, Henze N, Schwind V. Social acceptability in context: stereotypical perception of shape, body location,
and usage of wearable devices. Big Data Cogn Comput. 2022 Sep 23;6(4):100 [doi: 10.3390/bdcc6040100]
89. Gugenheimer J, Mai C, McGill M, Williamson J, Steinicke F, Perlin K. Challenges using head-mounted displays in shared
and social spaces. In: Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 2019 Presented at: CHI EA '19; May 4-9, 2019; Glasgow, Scotland [doi: 10.1145/3290607.3299028]
90. Johnson CM, Johnson TR, Zhang J. A user-centered framework for redesigning health care interfaces. J Biomed Inform.
2005 Feb;38(1):75-87 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2004.11.005] [Medline: 15694887]
91. Jackson AE, Holt RJ, Culmer PR, Makower SG, Levesley MC, Richardson RC, et al. Dual robot system for upper limb
rehabilitation after stroke: the design process. Proc Inst Mech Eng C J Mech Eng Sci. 2016 Aug 10;221(7):845-857 [doi:
10.1243/0954406jmes561]
92. Sun X, Ding J, Dong Y, Ma X, Wang R, Jin K, et al. A survey of technologies facilitating home and community-based
stroke rehabilitation. Int J Hum Comput Interact. 2022 Apr 20;39(5):1016-1042 [doi: 10.1080/10447318.2022.2050545]
93. Fryer CE, Luker JA, McDonnell MN, Hillier SL. Self management programmes for quality of life in people with stroke.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016 Aug 22;2016(8):CD010442 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD010442.pub2]
[Medline: 27545611]
94. Chan K. A design thinking mindset beyond the public health model. World Med Health Policy. 2018 Mar 12;10(1):111-119
[doi: 10.1002/wmh3.253]
95. Mendoza V, Novick DG. Usability over time. In: Proceedings of the 23rd annual international conference on Design of
communication: documenting & designing for pervasive information. 2005 Presented at: SIGDOC '05; September 21-23,
2005; Coventry, UK [doi: 10.1145/1085313.1085348]
96. Biduski D, Bellei EA, Rodriguez JP, Zaina LA, De Marchi AC. Assessing long-term user experience on a mobile health
application through an in-app embedded conversation-based questionnaire. Comput Hum Behav. 2020 Mar;104:106169
[doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2019.106169]
97. Kujala S, Miron-Shatz T. The evolving role of expectations in long-term user experience. In: Proceedings of the 19th
International Academic Mindtrek Conference. 2015 Presented at: AcademicMindTrek '15; September 22-24, 2015; Tampere,
Finland [doi: 10.1145/2818187.2818271]
98. Powell BJ, Waltz TJ, Chinman MJ, Damschroder LJ, Smith JL, Matthieu MM, et al. A refined compilation of implementation
strategies: results from the expert recommendations for implementing change (ERIC) project. Implement Sci. 2015 Feb
12;10:21 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/s13012-015-0209-1] [Medline: 25889199]
99. Cahill LS, Carey LM, Lannin NA, Turville M, Neilson CL, Lynch EA, et al. Implementation interventions to promote the
uptake of evidence-based practices in stroke rehabilitation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020 Oct 15;10(10):CD012575
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD012575.pub2] [Medline: 33058172]
100. Murrell JE, Pisegna JL, Juckett LA. Implementation strategies and outcomes for occupational therapy in adult stroke
rehabilitation: a scoping review. Implement Sci. 2021 Dec 18;16(1):105 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/s13012-021-01178-0]
[Medline: 34922568]
Abbreviations
FES: functional electrical stimulation
ISO: International Organization for Standardization
https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023 | vol. 10 | e49702 | p. 20
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR REHABILITATION AND ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES Alder et al
Edited by A Mavragani; submitted 07.06.23; peer-reviewed by K Clanchy, G Nicora; comments to author 31.07.23; revised version
received 03.09.23; accepted 27.09.23; published 11.12.23
Please cite as:
Alder G, Taylor D, Rashid U, Olsen S, Brooks T, Terry G, Niazi IK, Signal N
A Brain Computer Interface Neuromodulatory Device for Stroke Rehabilitation: Iterative User-Centered Design Approach
JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023;10:e49702
URL: https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702
doi: 10.2196/49702
PMID:
©Gemma Alder, Denise Taylor, Usman Rashid, Sharon Olsen, Thonia Brooks, Gareth Terry, Imran Khan Niazi, Nada Signal.
Originally published in JMIR Rehabilitation and Assistive Technology (https://rehab.jmir.org), 11.12.2023. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),
which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work, first published in JMIR
Rehabilitation and Assistive Technology, is properly cited. The complete bibliographic information, a link to the original publication
on https://rehab.jmir.org/, as well as this copyright and license information must be included.
https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2023 | vol. 10 | e49702 | p. 21
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX