JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Lee et al
Original Paper
Global Infectious Disease Surveillance and Case Tracking System
for COVID-19: Development Study
Hsiu-An Lee1,2,3,4,5, MS; Hsin-Hua Kung2,3,4,5, MS; Yuarn-Jang Lee6, PhD; Jane C-J Chao7,8, PhD; Jai Ganesh
Udayasankaran3,4,9, MSc, MBA; Hueng-Chuen Fan10,11,12, PhD; Kwok-Keung Ng3,13, BS; Yu-Kang Chang10,11, PhD;
Boonchai Kijsanayotin3,4,14, MSc, MD, PhD; Alvin B Marcelo3,4,15, MD; Chien-Yeh Hsu2,3,4,5,8, PhD
1Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Tamkang University, New Taipei, Taiwan
2Taiwan e-Health Association, Taipei, Taiwan
3Asia eHealth Information Network, Hong Kong, Hong Kong
4Standards and Interoperability Lab, Smart Healthcare Center of Excellence, Taipei, Taiwan
5Department of Information Management, National Taipei University of Nursing and Health Sciences, Taipei, Taiwan
6Division of Infection Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan
7Nutrition Research Center, Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan
8Master Program in Global Health and Development, College of Public Health, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan
9Sri Sathya Sai Central Trust, Prasanthi Nilayam, Puttaparthi, India
10Department of Rehabilitation, Jen-Teh Junior College of Medicine, Nursing and Management, Miaoli, Taiwan
11Department of Medical Research, Tung’s Taichung Metroharbor Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan
12Department of Pediatrics, Tung’s Taichung Metroharbor Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan
13eHealth Research Institute, Hong Kong, Hong Kong
14Thai Health Information Standards Development Center, Health System Research Institute, Ministry of Public Health, Bangkok, Thailand
15University of the Philippines, Manila, Philippines
Corresponding Author:
Chien-Yeh Hsu, PhD
Department of Information Management
National Taipei University of Nursing and Health Sciences
365 Ming-te Road
Peitou District
Taipei, 11219
Taiwan
Phone: 886 28227101
Email: cyhsu@ntunhs.edu.tw
Abstract
Background: COVID-19 has affected more than 180 countries and is the first known pandemic to be caused by a new virus.
COVID-19’s emergence and rapid spread is a global public health and economic crisis. However, investigations into the disease,
patient-tracking mechanisms, and case report transmissions are both labor-intensive and slow.
Objective: The pandemic has overwhelmed health care systems, forcing hospitals and medical facilities to find effective ways
to share data. This study aims to design a global infectious disease surveillance and case tracking system that can facilitate the
detection and control of COVID-19.
Methods: The International Patient Summary (IPS; an electronic health record that contains essential health care information
about a patient) was used. The IPS was designed to support the used case scenario for unplanned cross-border care. The design,
scope, utility, and potential for reuse of the IPS for unplanned cross-border care make it suitable for situations like COVID-19.
The Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources confirmed that IPS data, which includes symptoms, therapies, medications, and
laboratory data, can be efficiently transferred and exchanged on the system for easy access by physicians. To protect privacy,
patient data are deidentified. All systems are protected by blockchain architecture, including data encryption, validation, and
exchange of records.
http://medinform.jmir.org/2020/12/e20567/ JMIR Med Inform 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e20567 | p. 1
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Lee et al
Results: To achieve worldwide COVID-19 surveillance, a global infectious disease information exchange must be enacted. The
COVID-19 surveillance system was designed based on blockchain architecture. The IPS was used to exchange case study
information among physicians. After being verified, physicians can upload IPS files and receive IPS data from other global cases.
The system includes a daily IPS uploading and enhancement plan, which covers real-time uploading through the interoperation
of the clinic system, with the module based on the Open Application Programming Interface architecture. Through the treatment
of different cases, drug treatments, and the exchange of treatment results, the disease spread can be controlled, and treatment
methods can be funded. In the Infectious Disease Case Tracking module, we can track the moving paths of infectious disease
cases. The location information recorded in the blockchain is used to check the locations of different cases. The Case Tracking
module was established for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to track cases and prevent disease spread.
Conclusions: We created the IPS of infectious diseases for physicians treating patients with COVID-19. Our system can help
health authorities respond quickly to the transmission and spread of unknown diseases, and provides a system for information
retrieval on disease transmission. In addition, this system can help researchers form trials and analyze data from different countries.
A common forum to facilitate the mutual sharing of experiences, best practices, therapies, useful medications, and clinical
intervention outcomes from research in various countries could help control an unknown virus. This system could be an effective
tool for global collaboration in evidence-based efforts to fight COVID-19.
(JMIR Med Inform 2020;8(12):e20567) doi: 10.2196/20567
KEYWORDS
blockchain; infectious disease surveillance; international collaboration; HL7 FHIR; COVID-19 defense; COVID-19
today’s age of information, our global connectivity gives us a
Introduction
strong advantage in the fight against infectious diseases. We
can analyze large amounts of data to identify outbreaks across
COVID-19, which presumably originated in bats and was
different parts of the world, and we can use advanced machine
transmitted to humans by means of unknown mechanisms in
learning models to predict their future movement across different
Wuhan, Hubei Province, China in December 2019, has affected
geographical territories. The challenge is that collating relevant
more than 180 countries and territories around the world. On
data and standardizing it on a global level is a complicated task.
March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO)
In many parts of the world, data does not flow easily from
characterized the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic. This is
hospitals into the public realm or across borders. Global data
the first pandemic known to be caused by a new virus. Although
standards have yet to be developed, and this creates gaps in the
the complete clinical picture with regard to COVID-19 is not
data sets and delays in how the data can be used to shape global
fully known, based on currently available information, older
health efforts. One way of improving the speed that data is
adults and people with serious underlying medical conditions
standardized could be to encourage better interconnectivity
might be at a higher risk for the severe illness caused by
across national data systems by using more homogenous data
COVID-19.
standards. This would require a great deal of collaboration
Since a total of 41 cases with an unknown etiology of pneumonia between the various stakeholders, and it could be challenging
were confirmed in Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China in to promote it across borders [10].
December 2019 [1], COVID-19 has spread rapidly across that
The challenge of a slow and insufficient global information
country and around the world [2-8]. Thus far, it has affected
flow could be tackled by a good framework such as the Asia
more than 12,723,798 people in 188 countries and regions (data
eHealth Information Network’s Governance, Architecture,
obtained through July 12, 2020) [9]. COVID-19 is now the most
Program Management, Standards and Interoperability
serious infectious disease event after severe acute respiratory
framework as well as a good collaboration model.
syndrome (SARS) in 2003, and no effective vaccine, drug, or
treatment has been found. According to different research case reports in China [2,5,6],
of the patients who are in the 18 years and older group, 61.9%
Many different infectious diseases still exist in the world, such
(n=172) were male, and in another report, 2 of 13 patients with
as the Ebola hemorrhagic fever, the highly pathogenic avian
COVID-19 were children, who ranged between 2 and 15 years
influenza, SARS, Middle East respiratory syndrome
old [11]. Conclusions of the symptoms and disease history of
(MERS)–related coronavirus, and seasonal influenza. When an
patients with COVID-19 were found in these studies.
infectious disease event occurs suddenly, it is crucial to find a
Hypertension and cardiovascular disease were the two most
quick treatment and control method. Normal patient treatment
common diseases in the adult patient group, followed by
needs to be based on the medical history and symptoms of the
diabetes mellitus. With regard to the symptoms, fever was the
different cases.
most common (n=28, 92.8%), followed by a cough (n=194,
The rise of COVID-19 was sudden and marked by the global 69.8%), dyspnea (n=96, 34.5%), myalgia (n=77, 27.7%), a
information flow not being fast enough and the case reports headache (n=20, 7.2%), diarrhea (n=17, 6.1%), a sore throat
being transmitted slowly, which has led to a sluggish treatment (5.1% [6]), and pharyngeal (17.4% [2]). Wang et al [2] showed
progress, patients not being cured in an efficient manner, and that the intensive care rate was significant in older patients.
the infectious disease still not being effectively controlled. In Other research noted that patients who needed intensive care
http://medinform.jmir.org/2020/12/e20567/ JMIR Med Inform 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e20567 | p. 2
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Lee et al
had a greater percentage of dyspnea than those not needing SARS outbreak in 2003, it was found that infections were caused
intensive care [2,5]. From a report presented by a Beijing by the drainage designs of high-rise buildings [19]. Information
research team, among 13 patients with COVID-19, 12 (92.3%) on the correlation between the context of the event, living,
had a fever, with a mean of 1.6 days before the patient went to transportation or environmental design, religion, and cultural
a hospital, and they had a cough (46.3%), myalgia (23.1%), behavior is critical for studying COVID-19 transmission.
upper airway congestion (61.5%), and a headache (23.1%) [11].
To understand the epidemiology and trends of COVID-19, the
Although there are many reports and studies on COVID-19, the WHO has provided a template for a case-based reporting form
details of disease control and treatment are still being broadcast and a data dictionary for that case-based reporting form, and it
slowly, which may cause the disease spread to be out of control has requested member countries to report probable and
and make it difficult to share the experiences of successful case confirmed cases of COVID-19 infection within 48 hours of their
treatments. According to the control status and experience of identification [20]. These reports are sent through the National
COVID-19, all cases should be uploaded to the WHO website Focal Point and the Regional Contact Point for International
by different governments, but the route of transmission is still Health Regulations at the appropriate WHO regional office.
difficult to track, and treatment experiences in different countries The WHO has asked the countries to provide aggregated data
cannot be effectively shared. A literature review of infectious for surveillance when it is not feasible to report case-based data.
disease surveillance, presented by Jajosky and Groseclose [12],
However, to the best of our knowledge, there has thus far been
and an analysis of the timeliness of reporting by the National
no functional collaborative global case exchange model that
Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System showed that longer
can cocreate case data on COVID-19 and facilitate care
reporting lags and the variability among the states limit its
coordination across countries. The aim of this study is to design
usefulness. Some systems have the function of being a static
an infectious disease surveillance module for the global
continuous spatial map of infectious disease risk, while others
exchange of infectious cases and the sharing of treatment
have the function of continuously updating the reporting of
experience. Information on the movement and path tracking of
infectious diseases, but there is still no system that combines
cases, including the linkage and correlation between each case,
these two functions [13].
can also be included in infectious disease control in various
After the rise of COVID-19, the problem has developed into countries. Therefore, when an infectious disease outbreak
the pathogenic spread across, and among, nations by means of occurs, it can be quickly controlled.
international travel, which has unfortunately enabled the
In the initial stages of the COVID-19 outbreak, little research
pathogens to invade new countries and adapt to new
was available on the data format of the disease, and no one knew
environments and hosts faster [14,15]. In many countries where
what the best data format was; there had only been some
the public health infrastructure is poor or where there is an
discussions on the importance of clinical data exchange
insufficient budget to develop it, the ability of electronic disease
regarding the disease.
surveillance, including data collection and an analysis capability,
should be improved [16,17]. Furthermore, the data exchange Currently, several places have created a Fast Healthcare
of international infectious disease reports and information has Interoperability Resources (FHIR)–based COVID-19 data
certain constraints, not only out of fear for the repercussions on structure. A good example is provided by the National
trade and tourism but also because of the delays in data transfer Coordinator for Health Information Technology in its
through the multiple levels of governments or organizations Interoperability Standards Advisory section of Interoperability
[18]. After experiencing epidemic infectious diseases caused for the COVID-19 Novel Coronavirus Pandemic [21,22],
by mutant viruses such as SARS and MERS, we have found namely, the Logica COVID-19 (FHIR v4.0.1) Implementation
that, when facing treatment for unknown diseases, related health Guide CI Build. The Logica used Health Level 7 (HL7) FHIR
organizations and authorities should conduct comprehensive profiles for COVID-19 to create an implementation guide for
tests, using different drugs and treatment methods, and they a collection or library of data elements that relate to COVID-19.
should then present the differences between each case and the This can be used in many different situations where COVID-19
analyzed treatment results to find the best treatment. However, data are shared to support patient care, billing, research, or
this process is tedious and dangerous, and it creates uncertainties public reporting.
regarding patient treatment. In the face of new infectious
Another example can be found in the Dedalus COVID-19
diseases, the exchange of treatment results and case experiences
Solution [23]. In their “COVID-19 Simplifier Project,” they
is critical.
used FHIR resources in the Dedalus COVID-19 Solution
When facing a new type of infectious disease, it is important software. The data elements cover a patient self-assessment, a
not only to treat the disease but also to prevent its contagion. remote clinical assessment, and telemedicine and
For example, hundreds of COVID-19 cases in South Korea were self-monitoring. They claimed that their first activations will
found to have occurred at the same church. Hundreds of cases be in Italy and France. Our study uses a similar method that
in Japan were found to have originated on a cruise ship. In Hong started from COVID-19–related clinical data, and we used the
Kong, several cases were found to have been infected through International Patient Summary (IPS) as a basis for the data
a hot pot meal. Iran’s speedy and large-scale infection may be structure. The IPS document is an electronic health record
due to specific types of religious behavior. In Italy, the outbreak (EHR) extract that contains essential health care information
may have been caused by the Italian culture, where hugs and for the necessary care of patients. Due to the rapid outbreak of
kisses are a common way of greeting someone. During the the disease in the early weeks, no format had been designed for
http://medinform.jmir.org/2020/12/e20567/ JMIR Med Inform 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e20567 | p. 3
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Lee et al
the exchange of COVID-19 data. Therefore, we designed a We understand that the data structure will not be perfect or
version of the IPS that can be used for COVID-19. comprehensive, but it can be modified in the future after more
and more institutions use the data structure to exchange records.
An IPS document is an EHR extract that contains essential
According to the research of Holmgren et al [25], the inability
health care information about a patient [24]. It is designed to
of hospitals to receive electronic data is an obstacle for the
support the used case scenario for unplanned, cross-border
effective monitoring of patient symptoms. Therefore, the aim
care, but it is not limited to that. It is intended to be international
of our study is to create a COVID-19 data structure and a system
(ie, to provide generic solutions for global application beyond
that can share the data among health care institutions. It is
a particular region or country), and the IPS data set is minimal
expected that the proposed system can contribute to the control
and nonexhaustive, specialty agnostic, and condition
of the COVID-19 situation.
independent yet still clinically relevant. The design, global
scope, and utility of IPS toward unplanned cross-border care,
Methods
and its potential for reuse, make it suitable for a situation like
COVID-19. The FHIR confirmed that IPS, including the
Architecture for the Global Infectious Disease
symptoms, therapies, medications, and laboratory data, can be
Surveillance and Case Tracking Model
efficiently transferred and exchanged on the system for easy
access by physicians. Patient data are deidentified to protect This study designs a global infectious disease surveillance and
their privacy. In addition, the blockchain-based architecture can case-tracking model, and it includes a “Case Study Upload
be used to ensure the security and immutability of the case data. Module,” a “Global Case Study Exchange Module,” and a “Case
Tracking Module.” Each module has different goals. The
Our goal is to provide an immediate reference for people to use
architecture of the global infectious disease surveillance and
in the current crisis, so the design is not focused on a single use
case-tracking model is shown in Figure 1.
case, and the IPS therefore has a more general data structure
that focuses on the clinical data needed for COVID-19.
Figure 1. Architecture for the Global Infectious Disease Surveillance and Case Tracking module. FHIR: Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources;
RWD: Responsive Web Design.
The main goal of the “Case Study Upload Module” is to allow and to include detailed information about the treatment of
physicians worldwide to continuously upload the IPS documents patients with COVID-19. Through sharing experience and
http://medinform.jmir.org/2020/12/e20567/ JMIR Med Inform 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e20567 | p. 4
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Lee et al
patient summaries with other physicians, they can find better by a global team [26]. The IPS continuity of each patient will
essential treatment methods. This module has the ability to be connected through the information of the blockchain. User
identify and verify the identity of physicians in different identities are divided into two types, namely, physicians and
countries or regions. The “Global Case Study Exchange CDC members. Physicians need to be authenticated through
Module” allows physicians to brainstorm together on different their medical ID certificate in their countries, and CDC members
patient summaries and to learn about, and find, possible potential are registered and managed by the CDC units in various
treatments. A large amount of open and complete information countries.
is required for currently unsolved disease treatment issues.
The IPS Tailored for COVID-19 Case Data
Under the condition of privacy protection and the provision of
correct information with regard to the different case symptoms, An “International Patient Summary Implementation Guide” has
treatment methods, drugs, etc, it may be possible to find the been published by HL7 FHIR. The goal is to provide a universal
best antidote to solve the infectious disease crisis the world is international solution for global health care service applications.
facing. The “Case Tracking Module” allows Centers for Disease This study uses the IPS (Standard for Trial Use 1-FHIR R4,
Control and Prevention (CDC) members to track a patient’s launched on August 6, 2019) as a case study, as it provides
movement path before a diagnosis is made. The tracking map treatment and health care information records for global cases
is shown in the module. According to different patients’ of unknown infectious diseases. IPS is a minimal and
statements about their own moving paths, a moving map can nonexhaustive patient summary, which means that it is not
be established that contains international paths. CDC members intended to copy the full content of an EHR. The IPS is usable
will be able to carry out risk control and track high-risk groups by clinicians for the unscheduled cross-border care of a patient
according to this map, thereby effectively controlling the scope and focuses on a patient’s current condition, instead of anything
of disease infection and completing it as soon as possible. specific to a particular condition. Furthermore, the IPS is applied
on a global scale to address the international feasibility of use
The security and correctness of the IPS are protected by
as much as possible.
blockchain architecture. When IPS data are uploaded, the details
of the data will be deidentified, the block will store the data To provide a reference for global cases, the IPS is designed to
update log, and the IPS hash value is calculated by the Secure include information on the following: “Medication Summary,”
Hash Algorithm (SHA)-256. The IPS data are stored in the “Allergies and Intolerances,” “Problem List,” “Immunizations,”
HAPI FHIR database, which is open source and an “History of Procedures,” “Diagnostic Results,” “Vital Signs,”
implementation of the interoperability of HL7 FHIR for health “Past History of Illness,” “Plan of Care,” “History of Location
care systems in Java. It was developed as an open community and Moving Path before Diagnosis,” and “Location.” The
structure of the IPS is shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2. IPS contents mapped to the structures of FHIR resources. FHIR: Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources; IPS: International Patient
Summary.
http://medinform.jmir.org/2020/12/e20567/ JMIR Med Inform 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e20567 | p. 5
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Lee et al
Case Study Upload Module for IPS Protection and server, including the IPS hash value and the encrypted IPS index
Validation value. The deidentified and simplified case data include the
gender, age, symptoms, country, and location index value of
The physician uploads the patient’s IPS document to the
the HAPI server. After the physician has been authenticated,
system’s HAPI server, and the HAPI server corresponds to the
they have permission to upload the IPS document and view its
IPS index with the blockchain architecture. The IPS index
study cases. The encryption and decryption for the data upload
information was designed to connect the data from the HAPI
process and architecture is shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3. The encryption and decryption for the data upload process and architecture. FHIR: Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources; IPS: International
Patient Summary.
The steps of this process are as follows: Global Case Study Exchange Module
• Step 1: The certified physician uploads the patient’s IPS In a state of globalization, new diseases or clinical pathways
file to the system, and the IPS file will be stored in the HAPI that are not treated correctly are likely to rage around the world.
server. Patient identification will be replaced by a globally COVID-19 has spread worldwide, and therapeutic vaccines and
unique identifier (GUID), which is an 128-bit number that drugs have not yet been developed to treat it. This study
is used to identify the information in the system. constructed a global patient summary exchange model and
• Step 2: The data index position of the IPS is obtained from shared the global research progress through case analyses so
the HAPI server. that physicians in different regions of the world can refer to the
• Step 3: The private key of the uploaded physician is used results of acquisition and test cases while at the same time
to encrypt the IPS index of the data, which is stored in the obtaining and learning more about the unknown disease and
HAPI server. finding the best treatment process.
• Step 4: The anonymous IPS public information is obtained
Our study is designed for IPS sharing, which can help clinical
from the HAPI server, including the mobile path index
physicians to find successful treatments and clinical pathways
position, gender, age, country, and symptoms.
to improve the patients’survival and reduce sequelae. We have
• Step 5: The hash value of the IPS file is calculated by the
designed the model so that physicians need to register first and
SHA-256 encryption function.
provide proof of their identity. The system provides each
• Step 6: The content of this block is transferred to the
physician with a privacy key for IPS decryption. This system
blockchain architecture, and a new block is established by
allows physicians to view the summary of the patient cases that
the blockchain architecture.
have been uploaded all over the world, and it provides a filter
function of the cases. Specific cases can be tracked by using
this module. The process of how physicians get the IPS files of
global study cases is shown in Figure 4.
http://medinform.jmir.org/2020/12/e20567/ JMIR Med Inform 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e20567 | p. 6
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Lee et al
Figure 4. Process of physicians getting the IPS files of global case studies. FHIR: Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources; IPS: International Patient
Summary; SHA: Secure Hash Algorithm.
We designed a nine-step process for completing the Systems • Step 9: All the IPS files of the selected cases are presented
Engineering Initiative for Patient Safety (SEIPS) access to on the physician’s display.
international cases, which includes a data search, decryption,
The module is designed as a web-based application, and it
verification, and transmission.
includes the Open Application Programming Interface (API)
• Step 1: The system verifies the identity of the user, architecture. The module provides various APIs to let the public
confirming that the user is a physician with registration and private physicians’clinic management system operate easily
data. with the module and to conduct the case exchange.
• Step 2: A list of global patients and simple case information
Case Tracking Module for Infectious Disease
is provided to the physicians, including the patient’s region,
Prevention
country, age, and gender.
• Step 3: The index of the selected SEIPS is decrypted by the The prevalence of international tourism and the rapid movement
privacy key of the physician who is uploading the IPS file. of populations, in an era of globalization, have increased the
• Step 4: The selected patient IPS file is retrieved from the spread of COVID-19. In just 3 months, it has spread from a
decentralized database. limited area (one city in Asia) to becoming a source of infection
• Step 5: The decrypted IPS data are hashed again by throughout the world, and the number of infected people
SHA-256. continues to increase.
• Step 6: The hash value that is decrypted in step 5 is
To effectively control the scope of infection and prevent
compared to the hash value in the blockchain.
continued expansion, the movement path of patients who are
• Step 7: If the two hash values are equal, it means the data
infected needs to be tracked. The FHIR “Location” resource is
are correct, and the decrypted data are transmitted to the
included in the patient’s IPS file, and it helps CDC members
physician.
effectively track the patients and prevent the continued spread
• Step 8: The system confirms that the physician has obtained
of the disease, based on the record of moving paths and time
the decrypted case study data.
stamps. The workflow of case tracking is shown in Figure 5.
http://medinform.jmir.org/2020/12/e20567/ JMIR Med Inform 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e20567 | p. 7
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Lee et al
Figure 5. Workflow of case tracking. CDC: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
adopted as the consensus on the blockchain. In 2015, PoA was
Structure of Blockchain Security
proposed by the Ethereum cofounder, Gavin Wood [27]. This
The blockchain architecture was established as the security consensus algorithm is used to set up trusted nodes as block
protection mechanism of IPS data, and the HAPI server was validators. It is a centralized consensus mechanism that ensures
used as a data server for the FHIR IPS. The block in the data security and data verification through authorization
blockchain is public data for all users and includes the IPS index mechanisms. The blocks on the chain are generated by trusted
information and deidentified simple case data, which includes nodes, which can improve the efficiency of the generating blocks
gender, age, symptoms, country, and the HAPI server data index. and ensure consistent data. At the mean times, the system runs
well. The ownership of the nodes depends on the policy of the
Blockchains have many different authority mechanisms. In this
health care authority in different areas. For example, it can be
study, considering the privacy of a patient’s medical data and
a hospital center or the CDC of a nation.
the need to process a large amount of medical information, the
blockchain was built in a private chain, and a Proof of Authority The process of generating a new block includes four steps, as
(PoA), with a fast transaction speed and high privacy, was shown in Figure 6.
Figure 6. The process of generating a new block. FHIR: Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources; IPS: International Patient Summary; MVC:
model–view–controller.
• Step 1: The IPS index of the HAPI server is transmitted to
Results
the node.
• Step 2: The private key is used to sign the content in the
Global Infectious Disease Surveillance of the IPS for
block.
Case Studies
• Step 3: The block content is transferred to the private
blockchain domain. When facing the spread of an unknown disease around the
• Step 4: The authority node generates a new block. world, such as COVID-19, global case studies must be shared
and exchanged quickly. Clinical data must be allowed to be
Blockchain architecture will automatically copy the new block
transmitted efficiently and safely to jointly find the most
data to other nodes to complete the goal of blockchain
appropriate control and treatment methods through international
decentralization.
cooperation. Because different patients have different disease
histories, family disease histories, and life environments, their
symptoms and disease progression will be different.
An example of this is the SARS outbreak in 2003. After the
outbreak, Hong Kong found numerous problems in the
surveillance systems of communicable diseases, and the 2003
contact tracking system was inadequate for dealing with the
http://medinform.jmir.org/2020/12/e20567/ JMIR Med Inform 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e20567 | p. 8
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Lee et al
scale of the SARS epidemic. The public health surveillance to the IPS HL7 FHIR guidelines. The IPS that we designed
systems were not well developed in the private sector and in includes the following: “Medication Summary,” “Allergies and
community clinics, there was no comprehensive laboratory Intolerances,” “Problem List,” “Immunizations,” “History of
surveillance system, and the hospital authority’s laboratory Procedures,” “Diagnostic Results,” “Vital Signs,” “Past History
database was not linked to the department of health in the early of Illness,” “Plan of Care,” and “History of Location and
stages of the epidemic. Moving Path before Diagnosis.” The IPS content with the
structures of FHIR resources is shown in Figure 7.
This study thus designs an IPS that complies with infectious
disease surveillance and clinically meaningful data, according
Figure 7. International Patient Summary contents are mapped to the structures of the Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources.
The Medication Summary section includes a description of the of Location and Moving Path section includes where the patient
current and past medications that a patient takes. The Allergies has moved from and to during the incubation period of the
or Intolerances section of a patient includes a description of the infectious disease, as well as the location where the patient was
kind of reaction, the agents that caused it, as well as the infected (eg, a hospital, hotel, restaurant, bus, plane, or cruise
criticality and the certainty of the allergy. The Problem List ship). This section is important for controlling the spread of the
section includes clinical problems and the conditions of the disease, identifying potential patients, and completing
patient that are currently being monitored. The Immunizations prevention.
section includes a patient’s current immunization status and
After the data of the FHIR IPS is uploaded, the system accepts
pertinent immunization history. The History of Procedures
the input by using the JavaScript Object Notation format. The
section includes a description of the patient procedures that are
FHIR IPS integrates each different resource into the same file
within the scope of the IPS. The Diagnostic Results section
as a “bundle” resource, and finally, it is uploaded into the HAPI
includes the relevant observations and in vitro biological
server.
specimens that are collected from the patient. In this section,
the laboratory, imaging, and pathology reports may be included. Global COVID-19 Surveillance System for Case
The Vital Signs section includes the data collected when the Studies
patient received a medical service or was under surveillance in
To achieve the purpose of global COVID-19 surveillance and
the hospital, such as the body temperature, blood pressure, heart
to enhance health resilience, the exchange of global infectious
rate, respiratory rate, height, weight, and BMI. The History of
disease information must be enacted. The COVID-19
Illnesses section includes the patient’s disease history. This
surveillance system was built and designed based on the
section can help physicians to make clinical decisions and get
blockchain architecture. The IPS is used to exchange case study
more information from the data. The Plan of Care section
information among physicians. When physicians pass the system
includes a description of the clinical care, such as a plan of the
verification, they can upload the case IPS file and get the IPS
proposals, goals, monitoring, tracking, and ordering of
data of other global cases from the system. The IPS file should
requirements to improve the patient’s condition. The History
http://medinform.jmir.org/2020/12/e20567/ JMIR Med Inform 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e20567 | p. 9
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Lee et al
be uploaded daily by the physician. The system includes daily the system UI, as shown in Figure 9. The screening conditions
IPS uploading and an enhancement plan, which covers real-time are gender, age, and symptoms, which are used to
uploading through the interoperation of the clinic system with screen-reference the cases that are similar to their own case.
the module, based on the Open API architecture. The case IPS information can be viewed in Panel 3, which
includes all the uploaded IPS files, the basic information of the
All physician users have access to the case IPS files in the case
patient summary, and the IPS information on the blockchain.
study system to support clinical decision making. The system’s
The detailed IPS content is viewed in Panel 4. The authenticated
user interface (UI) is shown in Figure 8, and it is divided into
physician can use this system to share and exchange the patient
four panels that achieve different functions. The case diagram
IPS files to provide international references. Through the
is displayed in Panel 1, where users can obtain the number of
treatment of different cases, the drug treatments, and the
cases and international case distribution information. Cases
exchange of the patient treatment results, the spread of the
from different places can be selected in Panel 2, as well as in
disease can be controlled, and treatment methods can be funded.
Figure 8. The COVID-19 surveillance system. IPS: International Patient Summary.
In our design, the user selects the country to track the case in filter cases. After selecting a case, Panels 3 and 4 will display
Panel 1, and the country circle represents the number of cases. the IPS information of the selected case. The case selection
After selecting the country, Panel 2 will display the total number (Panel 2) is shown in Figure 9. It is a Taiwanese example, and
of case data that have been uploaded, as well as the GUID that the patient GUID is represented as
each case represents in the system. Panel 2 gives the option to “5AIF63A5-9KWE-1653-AR1I-49682N29A22.”
Figure 9. User interface of Case Selection (Panel 2).
http://medinform.jmir.org/2020/12/e20567/ JMIR Med Inform 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e20567 | p. 10
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Lee et al
Blockchain Information of IPS Data “57KGA693-2TLP-6A25-8Z8K-764A8G9A994.” In the
example, two blocks mean that the case has two uploaded IPS
In this study, all uploaded IPS information will be verified and
files, and the block information includes a time stamp, the
stored in the uploading record by using the blockchain. Panel
GUID, and the IPS-hash and -index, as well as the moving
3 is mainly the block information of the selected case. Figure
location, country, gender, age, and symptoms.
10 shows the block information of a patient whose GUID is
Figure 10. User interface of case tracking by block information.
real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. The
IPS File of COVID-19 Case
treatment for this patient was supportive care. The patient
A COVID-19 case report is to be used as an example in this received the antipyretic therapy, which consisted of 300 mg of
study. On February 5, 2020, a female patient 52 years of age ibuprofen every 6 hours and 400 mg of acetaminophen every 6
presented with a fever and went to a hospital [28]. The patient hours for symptom management. The patient also received
had type 2 diabetes and had visited Wuhan on January 20. She approximately 6 liters of normal saline and 300 mg of
developed a fever and myalgia 5 days after her return to Taiwan. guaifenesin for her continued cough. An example of a
She self-reported that she did not have dyspnea, a cough, chest COVID-19 IPS file is shown in Figure 11.
pain, or diarrhea. The diagnosis of COVID-19 was made by a
http://medinform.jmir.org/2020/12/e20567/ JMIR Med Inform 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e20567 | p. 11
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Lee et al
Figure 11. An example of a COVID-19 IPS file. IPS: International Patient Summary.
The following is additional information about the patient: • Patient received 300 mg of guaifenesin for her cough
and approximately 8 liters of normal saline during the
• Medication Summary
first 6 days of hospitalization.
• 6 liters of normal saline ondansetron
• 300 mg of guaifenesin • Vital Signs
• 300 mg of ibuprofen • Body temperature of 37.5 °C
• 400 mg of acetaminophen • Blood pressure of 138/82 mm Hg
• Pulse of 105 beats per minute
• Problem List
• Respiratory rate of 15 breaths per minute
• Dry cough
• Oxygen saturation of 95% while the patient was
• Fever
breathing ambient air
• 2-day history of nausea
• 2-day history of vomiting • History of Illness
• Hypertriglyceridemia
• Immunizations
• Hypertension
• History of Procedures
Based on other IPS files, international physicians can refer to
the care plans of other patient, as well as their disease history,
http://medinform.jmir.org/2020/12/e20567/ JMIR Med Inform 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e20567 | p. 12
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Lee et al
medication, and therapy, and give their own patients the COVID-19 case tracking system is shown in Figure 12. The UI
appropriate therapy. Our system provides a new architecture is divided into two panels. Nine cases that were diagnosed as
for the exchange of IPS files. COVID-19 in Taiwan were sampled as an example to show the
case tracking function of the system. Their data were uploaded
Case Tracking of COVID-19
onto the blockchain, and the distributions of the moving paths
From the establishment of the infectious disease case-tracking of all cases is shown in Panel 1, where we can see all the
module, and by using the location information in the IPS file worldwide cases as well as their moving paths in different colors
of the patient, we can track the moving paths of infectious on the map. The detailed case moving path information and
disease cases. The location information of the patient is recorded history record is shown in Panel 2, with the locations, time
in the block contents on the blockchain and is not protected as stamps, and possible activities. In Panel 2 of Figure 12, we show
personal clinical data. Therefore, the location information can the detailed information of one case. We can see that from
be retrieved and used by the system for the purpose of tracking March 15-21, 2020, the case had travelled in the United
the moving paths for different cases. The Case Tracking module Kingdom. The case came back to Taiwan on March 21, showed
has been established for CDC members to track cases and some symptoms, and went to the emergency room. The case
prevent the spread of a disease. Based on this module, CDC was confirmed as COVID-19 on March 23, and respirator use
members can identify the moving paths of cases and design a was started on March 27. From these nine samples, we can see
case tracking plan for the epidemic investigation. The UI of the that all of the cases were imported from outside of Taiwan.
Figure 12. The COVID-19 Case Tracking system. Panel 1 shows the distributions of the moving paths of all the cases. Panel 2 shows the detailed
moving path information and history record with the locations, time stamps, and possible activities. CT: computed tomography; RT-PCR: reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction.
they can try a specific treatment or medicine when facing
Discussion
unknown diseases such as COVID-19. Data from other countries
or other patients can be taken as a reference for patient care and
After the outbreak of infectious diseases such as SARS, MERS,
treatment. According to published studies, having a fever and
and COVID-19, it is well-known that international cooperation
a cough are the dominant symptoms of COVID-19, while
for disease treatment is critical, especially due to the current
gastrointestinal symptoms are uncommon [5,30,31]. One report
high frequency of travel between countries around the world.
presents the first confirmed case of COVID-19 in the United
Diseases such as SARS and MERS not only affect people’s
States, including the process of identification, diagnosis, clinical
health but also seriously affect the world economy [29].
course, management, and the patient’s symptoms [3]. Overall,
Although the deterioration of a disease condition depends on
there is an important need for coordination between clinicians
many variables, when facing unknown diseases, experience
and public health authorities, as well as for the rapid transfer of
sharing and the exchange of advice are still key points. The
clinical information relating to the care of patients with
control and treatment of any disease needs to be found as soon
COVID-19.
as possible. To control and treat the disease, a global case study
sharing system must be established, not only for clinical data One case study of the first-known imported case of COVID-19
sharing but also for the development of treatment methods. infection in Taiwan describes how the doctor gave the patient
supporting treatment for all her symptoms. However, there is
Through the system designed by this study, minimal and useful
still a lack of details on the clinical information about the patient
patient summary data can be shared. Physicians only need to
[28]. Another study of numerous cases was conducted by Chan
focus on essential clinical data that can be followed up on, and
http://medinform.jmir.org/2020/12/e20567/ JMIR Med Inform 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e20567 | p. 13
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Lee et al
et al [32] at Hong Kong University. They found that the outbreak blockchain architecture. Over the past few years, blockchain
of COVID-19 in Wuhan, China was similar to the 2003 SARS has been used in many different fields, not only with regard to
outbreak in Guangzhou, China. Both outbreaks initially medical records (EHRs and personal health records) but also to
happened in the animal-to-people transmission model and not medical data exchange issues. Benil and Jasper [35] introduced
by person-to-person transmission in the community. The case blockchain architecture for managing EHRs. In its design, the
study exchange from the model and the subsequent knowledge EHR is stored in the cloud, and its integrity in the cloud will be
exchange, analysis, conclusion, planning, and evaluation will checked through the blockchain. This is a similar architecture
provide a basis for understanding the experiences of previous to our study and proves that the blockchain can protect and
epidemics, like SARS and MERS, and help to streamline the verify EHRs. Fan et al [36] proposed a blockchain-based
disease prevention and control measures (eg, regulations for consensus mechanism for medical information data security
animal and wet markets, patient isolation and tracking, contact and privacy in the medical system. Sun et al [37] presented a
quarantine, and public health and hygiene education) to prevent distributed signature scheme for medical systems with a
any rapid spread. As their system was helpless against SARS, record-sharing protocol that is based on blockchain. Yang and
Hong Kong later developed the Communicable Disease Li [38] designed an architecture for securing the EHR system,
Information System to provide real-time and intelligent which is based on distributed ledger technology, to improve the
syndromic and communicable disease surveillance; to enable interoperability of health record exchanges between different
rapid intervention and quicker outbreak and emergency organizations. Chen et al [39] introduced a searchable encryption
responses via field investigations, outbreak control, responsive scheme for EHRs by using blockchain. Blockchain architecture
risk communication, ongoing analysis, alert generation, can ensure data security and verify that the information is
predictive capability, and early outbreak detection; and to offer correct, and it is therefore a suitable architecture for global IPS
a framework for strategic planning and program evaluation. We file exchange.
can rapidly gather information for COVID-19 through
The results of this study can help health authorities respond
international channels, but the information is still not clear
quickly to the transmission and spread of any unknown disease,
enough to use as a reference for treating patients. Lipsitch et al
and it can provide a good system for information retrieval on
[33] showed that viral testing should not be used just for clinical
disease transmission. Another benefit of this system is that it
care, and public health efforts should use it to target the
can help public health researchers form study trials and analyze
trajectory and severity of the disease. Guan et al [34], from the
data from different countries. A trial on medication treatment
State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Diseases, noted the
in patients with COVID-19 found that the lopinavir–ritonavir
limitations of COVID-19 research due to the collection of data
treatment added to the standard supportive care, but it was not
from different structures of electronic databases and the urgent
significant for clinical improvement or mortality in patients
timeline for data extraction. Some cases, therefore, have
with COVID-19 [40]. Other research on the use of chloroquine
incomplete clinical data of the patients’exposure history and
and hydroxychloroquine in COVID-19 shows that the use of
laboratory testing [34].
these drugs is premature and potentially harmful [41].
The main challenge of COVID-19 is that we do not have enough
However, the clinical observation details of patients were not
knowledge of the therapy, control methods, and full spread route
described by the authors. It is hard to identify which supportive
of the virus, which can only be obtained from the patient. Based
care works best for patients in different situations. Another
on the experience of rapid virus transmission and the burden
effective means for fighting an unknown virus could be using
on the health care system, a global information system is
a common forum to facilitate the mutual sharing of experiences,
essential. When analyzing the development of COVID-19, it
best practices, therapies for patients, and the possible useful
seems that an effective global communicable disease
medications and outcomes from clinical interventions being
surveillance system has not yet been developed. The disease
trialed in various countries in a secure, trustworthy manner. The
data are not timely or effectively linked. Physicians and
system designed by this study can become an effective tool for
scientists around the world are unable to obtain sufficient disease
facilitating global collaboration and cooperation, and for
information in a thorough and timely manner to control the
promoting collective evidence-based efforts to address the
epidemic. Currently, the exchange of case data for clinical
unprecedented situation created by COVID-19. However, this
research on COVID-19 is incomplete and not quick enough,
study has some limitations. At present, there is no optimal
which limits the development of a treatment design. Even if
treatment, and complete information about this disease has not
many case reports were to be submitted, the goals of real-time
yet been found. Governments, medical institutions, and
tracking, data exchange, and referencing could not be achieved.
physicians from all over the world should cooperate in the study
Therefore, to reduce the restrictions on COVID-19 research, an
of this virus. Without international cooperation, global interests
EHRs–based information communication system is necessary,
will have significant losses. This study has completed the design
as it can quickly achieve such goals for the public.
and development of a global infectious disease surveillance and
This study created the IPS of infectious diseases that physicians case tracking system for COVID-19, and found that it has a
can access when treating patients with COVID-19. We have stable foundation and is a balanced system. However, there is
also established a secure blockchain architecture for the still a need to test the effectiveness of a large number of users
protection of the IPS, and we have completed the application uploading and exchanging data simultaneously. In the future,
of tracking patients’moving path. The IPS case studies can be our team will have discussions with governments, international
exchanged through our system and verified through the medical service providers, and medical institutions to activate
http://medinform.jmir.org/2020/12/e20567/ JMIR Med Inform 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e20567 | p. 14
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Lee et al
this system and to promote international cooperation and development during the COVID-19 outbreak.
Acknowledgments
This study received funding from the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan, under the project No. 108-3011-F-075-001
and the Ministry of Education, Taiwan, under the project No. 107EH12-22.
Authors' Contributions
This study was carried out in collaboration among all the authors. HAL and CYH conceptualized the research and designed the
architecture of the system. YJL and JCJC provided the IPS use case for testing and demonstration. JGU and KKN contributed to
the conceptualization. HAL, HHK, JGU, HCF, and KKN carried out the literature review. HAL, HHK, and YKC were instrumental
in the implementation of the system. HAL drafted the manuscript, and CYH and JGU made significant revisions. CYH, YJL,
JCJC, JGU, YKC, BK, ABM, and LRC supervised the methodology of implementing a global COVID-19 infectious disease
surveillance and case tracking system, and suggested valuable improvements. All authors approved the final version of the
manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest
None declared.
References
1. Lu H, Stratton CW, Tang Y. Outbreak of pneumonia of unknown etiology in Wuhan, China: the mystery and the miracle.
J Med Virol 2020 Apr;92(4):401-402 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1002/jmv.25678] [Medline: 31950516]
2. Wang D, Hu B, Hu C, Zhu F, Liu X, Zhang J, et al. Clinical characteristics of 138 hospitalized patients with 2019 novel
coronavirus-infected pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA 2020 Mar 17;323(11):1061-1069 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1001/jama.2020.1585] [Medline: 32031570]
3. Holshue ML, DeBolt C, Lindquist S, Lofy KH, Wiesman J, Bruce H, Washington State 2019-nCoV Case Investigation
Team. First case of 2019 novel coronavirus in the United States. N Engl J Med 2020 Mar 05;382(10):929-936 [FREE Full
text] [doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2001191] [Medline: 32004427]
4. Wang C, Horby PW, Hayden FG, Gao GF. A novel coronavirus outbreak of global health concern. Lancet 2020 Feb
15;395(10223):470-473 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30185-9] [Medline: 31986257]
5. Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, Hu Y, et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in
Wuhan, China. Lancet 2020 Feb 15;395(10223):497-506 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30183-5] [Medline:
31986264]
6. Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X, Qu J, Gong F, Han Y, et al. Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019
novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study. Lancet 2020 Feb 15;395(10223):507-513 [FREE Full
text] [doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30211-7] [Medline: 32007143]
7. Gorbalenya AE, Baker SC, Baric RS, de Groot RJ, Drosten C, Gulyaeva AA, et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related
coronavirus: the species and its viruses – a statement of the Coronavirus Study Group. BioRxiv. Preprint posted online
February 11, 2020. [doi: 10.1101/2020.02.07.937862]
8. Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, Wang X, Zhou L, Tong Y, et al. Early transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China, of novel
coronavirus-infected pneumonia. N Engl J Med 2020 Mar 26;382(13):1199-1207 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1056/NEJMoa2001316] [Medline: 31995857]
9. Dong E, Du H, Gardner L. An interactive web-based dashboard to track COVID-19 in real time. Lancet Infect Dis 2020
May;20(5):533-534. [doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30120-1] [Medline: 32087114]
10. Hamade MA. COVID-19: how to fight disease outbreaks with data. World Economic Forum. 2020 Mar 19. URL: https:/
/www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/03/covid-19-how-to-fight-disease-outbreaks-with-data[accessed 2020-04-10]
11. Chang D, Lin M, Wei L, Xie L, Zhu G, Dela Cruz CS, et al. Epidemiologic and clinical characteristics of novel coronavirus
infections involving 13 patients outside Wuhan, China. JAMA 2020 Mar 17;323(11):1092-1093 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1001/jama.2020.1623] [Medline: 32031568]
12. Jajosky RA, Groseclose SL. Evaluation of reporting timeliness of public health surveillance systems for infectious diseases.
BMC Public Health 2004 Jul 26;4:29 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-4-29] [Medline: 15274746]
13. Hay SI, George DB, Moyes CL, Brownstein JS. Big data opportunities for global infectious disease surveillance. PLoS
Med 2013;10(4):e1001413 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001413] [Medline: 23565065]
14. Lederberg J, Shope RE, Oaks SC, editors. Emerging Infections: Microbial Threats to Health in the United States. Washington,
DC: National Academies Press; 1992.
15. Feldmann H, Czub M, Jones S, Dick D, Garbutt M, Grolla A, et al. Emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases. Med
Microbiol Immunol 2002 Oct;191(2):63-74. [doi: 10.1007/s00430-002-0122-5] [Medline: 12410344]
http://medinform.jmir.org/2020/12/e20567/ JMIR Med Inform 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e20567 | p. 15
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Lee et al
16. Chretien J, Burkom HS, Sedyaningsih ER, Larasati RP, Lescano AG, Mundaca CC, et al. Syndromic surveillance: adapting
innovations to developing settings. PLoS Med 2008 Mar 25;5(3):e72 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0050072]
[Medline: 18366250]
17. Chretien J, Lewis SH. Electronic public health surveillance in developing settings: meeting summary. BMC Proc 2008 Nov
14;2 Suppl 3:S1 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/1753-6561-2-s3-s1] [Medline: 19025678]
18. Woodall J. Official versus unofficial outbreak reporting through the internet. Int J Med Inform 1997 Nov;47(1-2):31-34.
[doi: 10.1016/s1386-5056(97)00079-8] [Medline: 9506388]
19. Hung HC, Chan DW, Law LK, Chan EH, Wong ES. Industrial experience and research into the causes of SARS virus
transmission in a high-rise residential housing estate in Hong Kong. Building Services Eng Res Technol 2016 Jul
27;27(2):91-102. [doi: 10.1191/0143624406bt145oa]
20. Global surveillance for COVID-19 caused by human infection with COVID-19 virus: interim guidance, 20 March 2020.
World Health Organization. 2020. URL: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/331506[accessed 2020-12-17]
21. COVID-19 novel coronavirus pandemic. Interoperability Standards Advisory. 2020. URL: https://www.healthit.gov/isa/
covid-19[accessed 2020-07-07]
22. Logica. Table of contents. Logica COVID-19 FHIR Profile Library IG. 2020. URL: https://covid-19-ig.logicahealth.org/
toc.html[accessed 2020-07-07]
23. Dedalus COVID-19 Solution. Simplifier.net. 2020. URL: https://simplifier.net/guide/dedaluscovid-19solution/home
[accessed 2020-07-07]
24. Cangioli G, Hausam R, Macary F, Geßner C, Dickinson G, Heitmann KU, et al. International Patient Summary
Implementation guide. HL7 FHIR. 2020. URL: https://build.fhir.org/ig/HL7/fhir-ips/[accessed 2020-04-10]
25. Holmgren A, Apathy NC, Adler-Milstein J. Barriers to hospital electronic public health reporting and implications for the
COVID-19 pandemic. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2020 Aug 01;27(8):1306-1309 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocaa112]
[Medline: 32442266]
26. HAPI FHIR. 2020. URL: https://hapifhir.io/[accessed 2020-07-07]
27. Wood G. PoA private chains. GitHub. 2015. URL: https://github.com/ethereum/guide/blob/master/poa.md[accessed
2020-07-07]
28. Liu YC, Liao CH, Chang CF, Chou CC, Lin YR. A locally transmitted case of SARS-CoV-2 infection in Taiwan. N Engl
J Med 2020 Mar 12;382(11):1070-1072 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2001573] [Medline: 32050059]
29. Keogh-Brown MR, Smith RD. The economic impact of SARS: how does the reality match the predictions? Health Policy
2008 Oct;88(1):110-120 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/j.healthpol.2008.03.003] [Medline: 18436332]
30. Lei H, Li Y, Xiao S, Lin C, Norris SL, Wei D, et al. Routes of transmission of influenza A H1N1, SARS CoV, and norovirus
in air cabin: comparative analyses. Indoor Air 2018 May;28(3):394-403 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1111/ina.12445] [Medline:
29244221]
31. Otter J, Donskey C, Yezli S, Douthwaite S, Goldenberg S, Weber D. Transmission of SARS and MERS coronaviruses and
influenza virus in healthcare settings: the possible role of dry surface contamination. J Hosp Infect 2016 Mar;92(3):235-250
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/j.jhin.2015.08.027] [Medline: 26597631]
32. Chan JFW, Yuan S, Kok K, To KK, Chu H, Yang J, et al. A familial cluster of pneumonia associated with the 2019 novel
coronavirus indicating person-to-person transmission: a study of a family cluster. Lancet 2020 Feb 15;395(10223):514-523
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30154-9] [Medline: 31986261]
33. Lipsitch M, Swerdlow DL, Finelli L. Defining the epidemiology of covid-19 - studies needed. N Engl J Med 2020 Mar
26;382(13):1194-1196. [doi: 10.1056/NEJMp2002125] [Medline: 32074416]
34. Guan WJ, Ni ZY, Hu Y, Liang WH, Ou CQ, He JX, China Medical Treatment Expert Group for Covid-19. Clinical
characteristics of coronavirus disease 2019 in China. N Engl J Med 2020 Apr 30;382(18):1708-1720 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1056/NEJMoa2002032] [Medline: 32109013]
35. Benil T, Jasper J. Cloud based security on outsourcing using blockchain in E-health systems. Computer Networks 2020
Sep;178:107344. [doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2020.107344]
36. Fan K, Wang S, Ren Y, Li H, Yang Y. MedBlock: efficient and secure medical data sharing via blockchain. J Med Syst
2018 Jun 21;42(8):136. [doi: 10.1007/s10916-018-0993-7] [Medline: 29931655]
37. Sun Y, Zhang R, Wang X, Kaiqiang G, Liu L. A decentralizing attribute-based signature for healthcare blockchain. 2018
Presented at: 27th International Conference on Computer Communication and Networks (ICCCN); 2018; Hangzhou, China.
[doi: 10.1109/icccn.2018.8487349]
38. Yang G, Li C. A design of blockchain-based architecture for the security of electronic health record (EHR) systems. 2018
Presented at: IEEE International Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and Science (CloudCom); December 2018;
Nicosia, Cyprus. [doi: 10.1109/cloudcom2018.2018.00058]
39. Chen L, Lee W, Chang C, Choo KR, Zhang N. Blockchain based searchable encryption for electronic health record sharing.
Future Generation Computer Syst 2019 Jun;95:420-429. [doi: 10.1016/j.future.2019.01.018]
40. Cao B, Wang Y, Wen D, Liu W, Wang J, Fan G, et al. A trial of lopinavir-ritonavir in adults hospitalized with severe
covid-19. N Engl J Med 2020 May 07;382(19):1787-1799 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2001282] [Medline:
32187464]
http://medinform.jmir.org/2020/12/e20567/ JMIR Med Inform 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e20567 | p. 16
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Lee et al
41. Ferner RE, Aronson JK. Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine in covid-19. BMJ 2020 Apr 08;369:m1432. [doi:
10.1136/bmj.m1432] [Medline: 32269046]
Abbreviations
API: application programming interface
CDC: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
EHR: electronic health record
FHIR: Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources
GUID: globally unique identifier
HL7: Health Level 7
IPS: International Patient Summary
MERS: Middle East respiratory syndrome
PoA: Proof of Authority
SARS: severe acute respiratory syndrome
SEIPS: Systems Engineering Initiative for Patient Safety
UI: user interface
WHO: World Health Organization
Edited by G Eysenbach; submitted 26.05.20; peer-reviewed by Y Yu, E Chukwu, T Ueno; comments to author 29.06.20; revised version
received 17.07.20; accepted 15.12.20; published 22.12.20
Please cite as:
Lee HA, Kung HH, Lee YJ, Chao JCJ, Udayasankaran JG, Fan HC, Ng KK, Chang YK, Kijsanayotin B, Marcelo AB, Hsu CY
Global Infectious Disease Surveillance and Case Tracking System for COVID-19: Development Study
JMIR Med Inform 2020;8(12):e20567
URL: http://medinform.jmir.org/2020/12/e20567/
doi: 10.2196/20567
PMID: 33320826
©Hsiu-An Lee, Hsin-Hua Kung, Yuarn-Jang Lee, Jane C-J Chao, Jai Ganesh Udayasankaran, Hueng-Chuen Fan, Kwok-Keung
Ng, Yu-Kang Chang, Boonchai Kijsanayotin, Alvin B Marcelo, Chien-Yeh Hsu. Originally published in JMIR Medical Informatics
(http://medinform.jmir.org), 22.12.2020. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction
in any medium, provided the original work, first published in JMIR Medical Informatics, is properly cited. The complete
bibliographic information, a link to the original publication on http://medinform.jmir.org/, as well as this copyright and license
information must be included.
http://medinform.jmir.org/2020/12/e20567/ JMIR Med Inform 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e20567 | p. 17
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX