Scithon™Event - “Virtual and Augmented Reality in Surgical Education”
Dear Ladies and Gentleman,
We are very happy to welcome you to the first IRIS.AI Scithon™Event of the medical
field, investigating the topic of virtual and augmented reality in surgery with the help of the
IRIS.AI science assistant!
Virtual and Augmented Reality are new cutting edge technologies, with a high potential for
application in the medical field. Besides usage for diagnostic imaging applications and the
facilitation of minimally invasive procedures, the implementation of these technologies
could substantially improve medical education, particularly when it comes to teaching
practical tasks. In spite of all the technological advances in the medical field, the nature of
surgical training has only marginally changed in the last decades. Although a
variety of dummies and practice models are available, most training is done directly on the
patient. While a number of studies and projects have been performed on this topic, more
research and development work is necessary to routinely implement those technologies into
medical education. To investigate the most promising approach and the questions, that still
have to be answered in order to further the implementation of Virtual and Augmented
Reality, intensive literature research is necessary. Mapping out the research landscape
around a project however, is very time consuming and can often be frustrating as the sheer
size of published data is often nearly impossible to read and understand much less
to be put in context. IRIS.AI created an artificial intelligence technology to help researchers
overcome this problem. The IRIS.AI science assistant is an artificial intelligence
technology, which can read scientific papers and to some extent understand their
content. Using this technology allows researchers to overcome the limitations of a human
brain when it comes to screening vast amounts of data and find scientific data faster and
more efficiently. The Division of Urotechnology, University Medical Center Freiburg, in
cooperation with the Stryker Leibinger GmbH & Co. KG, intends with your help
to evaluate the IRIS.AI technology for the usage in medical research as well as
to map out the research landscape regarding virtual and augmented reality in
surgery.
We are looking forward to a very productive event!
Priv.-Doz. Dr. Dr. med. univ. Arkadiusz Miernik, FEBU