Open Access Indonesian Journal of Medical Reviews Vol 3 Issue 6 2023
Open Access Indonesian Journal of
Medical Reviews
Journal Homepage: https://hmpublisher.com/index.php/OAIJMR
Development of a Reliable Information System for Medical Device Inventory in
Hospitals: A Systematic Literature Review
Suryati1*
1Nursing Management Study Program, Faculty of Nursing, Universitas Indonesia, Depok, Indonesia
ARTICLE INFO A B S T R A C T
Keywords: Developing an information system for medical equipment inventory in
Development hospitals not only includes technical aspects but also involves an in-depth
understanding of the operational needs of the hospital itself. By utilizing the
Hospital equipment
latest technology, such as the Internet of Things (IoT), and efficient data
Information
integration, hospitals can ensure that the information systems developed
Inventory can adapt to the dynamics of future technological needs and developments.
System This study aimed to explore the development of a reliable information system
for inventory of medical equipment in hospitals. The literature search
process was carried out on various databases (PubMed, Web of Sciences,
*Corresponding author:
EMBASE, Cochrane Libraries, and Google Scholar) regarding the
Suryati development of a reliable information system for the inventory of medical
devices in hospitals. This study follows the preferred reporting items for
systematic reviews and meta-analysis (PRISMA) recommendations.
E-mail address: Developing an information system for medical device inventory in hospitals
suryatimasaju2@gmail.com is a crucial step in improving the efficiency, availability, and management of
health resources. Developing an information system for medical device
inventory in hospitals is not just about recording and monitoring but also
The author has reviewed and approved the providing a holistic solution to improve operational efficiency and patient
final version of the manuscript. service.
https://doi.org/10.37275/oaijmr.v3i6.421
1. Introduction The reliability of information systems is the main key
Hospitals are complex health institutions where to ensuring the availability of adequate medical
managing medical equipment inventory is a critical equipment, reducing the risk of loss or shortage of
element in providing quality health services. The inventory and ensuring that each medical device can
correct and efficient use of medical equipment not only be used in optimal conditions.1-3
supports optimal diagnosis and treatment but also Developing an information system for medical
ensures patient safety and the operational efficiency of equipment inventory in hospitals not only includes
the hospital itself. Therefore, the development of an technical aspects but also involves an in-depth
information system that is relied upon to manage the understanding of the operational needs of the hospital
inventory of medical equipment in hospitals is an itself. By utilizing the latest technology, such as the
urgent need. In the era of continuously developing Internet of Things (IoT), and efficient data integration,
information technology, information systems can be hospitals can ensure that the information systems
an effective solution for improving medical equipment developed can adapt to the dynamics of future
inventory management. This system not only technological needs and developments. It is important
simplifies the recording and monitoring process but to note that the implementation of this information
also helps make more precise and real-time decisions. system is not only a step toward operational efficiency
534
but also an effort to improve health services as a “inventory” AND (2) “medical equipment” OR
whole. By ensuring the availability of optimal medical “hospital.” The literature is limited to studies and
equipment, hospitals can provide better care to published in English. The literature selection criteria
patients, increase medical staff productivity, and are articles published in the form of original articles, a
ultimately support the hospital's vision and mission as study about the development of a reliable information
a provider of superior and sustainable health system for inventory of medical equipment in
services.4-6 This study aimed to explore the hospitals, studies were conducted in a timeframe from
development of a reliable information system for 2013-2023, and the main outcome was the
inventory of medical equipment in hospitals. development of a reliable information system relied on
for inventory of medical equipment in hospitals.
2. Methods Meanwhile, the exclusion criteria were studies that
The literature search process was carried out on were not related to the development of a reliable
various databases (PubMed, Web of Sciences, information system for the inventory of medical
EMBASE, Cochrane Libraries, and Google Scholar) equipment in hospitals and duplication of
regarding the development of a reliable information publications. This study follows the preferred
system for the inventory of medical devices in reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-
hospitals. The search was performed using the terms: analysis (PRISMA) recommendations.
(1) “development” OR “system” OR “information” OR
Identification of studies via databases and registers
n
o
it
a Records removed before screening:
c if Records identified from: Duplicate records removed (n =0)
it Databases (n = 43) Records marked as ineligible by
n
e
d
automation tools (n = 0)
I Records removed for other reasons (n = 0)
Records screened Records excluded
(n = 22) (n = 21)
g
n in Reports sought for retrieval Reports not retrieved
e (n = 20) (n = 2)
e
r
c
S
Reports excluded:
Full text article exclude (n =5)
Reports assessed for eligibility Published not in English (n = 6)
(n = 6) Inappropriate methods (n = 3)
d e Studies included in review
d (n = 6)
u
lc
n
I
Figure 1. PRISMA flowchart.
535
3. Results and Discussion experience in inventory management.7-10
Identify needs and goals
Identification of a hospital's specific needs is a Business process analysis
critical step in the development of an information An in-depth analysis of the business processes
system for medical device inventory. Conduct associated with medical device inventory management
interviews with related parties at the hospital, such as involves a comprehensive understanding of how
warehouse staff, nursing staff, medical personnel, and medical devices are acquired, stored, reordered, and
operational managers. Ask about the daily challenges managed. The analysis begins by determining the need
they face in medical device inventory management and for medical equipment based on requests from various
listen to their expectations and needs for the new departments in the hospital. Identify clinical and
system. Review internal hospital documents, such as operational factors that influence medical device
inventory reports, expenditure records, and analysis of selection. Users or related departments submit
medical equipment needs. Assess weaknesses and requests for purchasing medical devices to the
potential improvements of existing inventory procurement department. This process includes
management systems. Conduct direct observations of technical specifications, quantities required, and
the medical equipment inventory management process reasons for selecting a particular medical device. The
in various units or departments in the hospital. procurement team evaluates proposals from potential
Identify manual processes that might be improved vendors. Vendor selection is based on criteria such as
with information systems. Conduct surveys or quality, price, after-sales support, and regulatory
distribute questionnaires to hospital staff to gain a compliance. After selecting vendors, medical
broader view of needs and expectations regarding equipment is purchased, and goods are received.
medical equipment inventory management. Collect Receiving information, including quantity and
quantitative and qualitative data to support needs condition of goods, is recorded in the system. Every
analysis. Conduct benchmarking with other hospitals medical device received is recorded in an inventory
that have successfully implemented information system, including information such as serial number,
systems for medical equipment inventory expiration date, and storage location. The use of
management. Compare best practices and understand barcode or RFID technology can speed up this process.
whether there are certain features or strategies that Establish optimal storage methods based on medical
can be adopted. Form a work team consisting of device characteristics, such as storage temperature,
representatives from various departments in the humidity, or other special requirements. Set storage
hospital, such as IT, warehouse, nursing, and locations for easy access and organization. Using
management. Hold regular meetings to discuss and sensor technology or real-time monitoring to ensure
validate needs. Create a visual mapping of the the condition of medical devices remains optimal
business processes involved in medical device during storage. Through an information system,
inventory management. Identify critical points and hospitals can monitor medical equipment supplies in
areas that can be optimized with information systems. real-time. This monitoring helps identify when medical
Assess the risks associated with medical device devices need to be reordered. Implementation of an
inventory management, such as the risk of stock automated ordering system based on minimum
calculation errors or the risk of losing medical devices. inventory limits or specific requests. Ensure the
Review compliance with applicable health regulations. availability of medical equipment without excessive
Hold focus meetings with related parties to deepen human intervention. The procurement team validates
specific areas that require special attention. Get in- orders to ensure compliance with needs and budget
depth input and solutions from those with direct availability. The information system tracks the
536
lifespan of each medical device to avoid use after a supports high availability and horizontal scalability.
specified time limit. Provide notifications if a medical Implement caching and load balancing mechanisms to
device is approaching its useful life limit. Establish improve system performance. Provide a good API to
preventive maintenance schedules for medical devices enable integration with other systems in the hospital,
to ensure optimal availability and prevent such as patient management systems or electronic
breakdowns. The system records the repair and medical records (EMR). Use message queues such as
replacement history of medical devices. Provides RabbitMQ or Apache Kafka to ensure reliable message
information for performance evaluation and decision- delivery between modules or systems. Implement
making regarding equipment replacement or appropriate middleware to unify disparate systems,
upgrades.11-13 ensuring interoperability between applications and
software.14,15
Technology selection
Choosing the right platform and technology is key System design
to building an information system for medical Users can submit new orders by filling out an
equipment inventory in hospitals. For inventory intuitive form. The form should include information
management, relational databases such as MySQL, such as the name of the medical device, the quantity
PostgreSQL, or Microsoft SQL Server can be used. ordered, and other specific requirements. There is an
NoSQL databases such as MongoDB can also be option to choose which vendor to select based on the
considered, especially if the inventory data has a evaluation of criteria such as price, quality, and
flexible structure. Design an adequate database delivery time. Users can see the status of their order,
schema to store information such as medical device whether it is in process, in delivery, or has been
data, stock status, storage location, and transaction received. Automatic notifications are sent to related
history. Make wise use of indexes to speed up search parties when order status changes. The system
and update operations. The choice of programming records order history for each medical device,
language can depend on the expertise of the including details such as order date, quantity, vendor,
development team and system requirements. and status. The system connects with automated
Languages such as Java, Python, or PHP are generally technology (e.g., barcode or RFID) to monitor stock in
used for web application development. The choice of real time. When there is a change in stock, the system
web-based technologies such as Node.js or Ruby on automatically updates the information in the
Rails can also be considered. Use development database. The system sends automatic notifications to
frameworks such as Django (Python), Spring (Java), or users or warehouse staff when medical equipment
Laravel (PHP) to speed up development and ensure stock approaches or reaches the specified minimum
application security. Leverage frontend technologies limit. The system records every stock update,
such as React, Angular, or Vue.js to create responsive including time, quantity added or reduced, and
and easy-to-use user interfaces. Choose a hosting responsible users. Users can select the type of report
service that is reliable and suits your needs, such as they want to create, such as availability, usage,
AWS, Azure, Google Cloud, or a local-based hosting equipment condition reports, or other custom reports.
platform such as Kubernetes. Consider using The system supports automatic scheduling of report
serverless services to reduce infrastructure generation, whether daily, weekly, or monthly reports,
complexity. Implement security protocols such as to ensure the availability of up-to-date information.
HTTPS for secure communications. Use firewalls and Reports are presented in the form of data
authentication mechanisms to protect access to visualizations that are easy to understand, such as
information systems. Design an architecture that graphs or diagrams, to support decision-making.
537
Users can export reports to commonly used formats, using medical devices for a particular patient. This
such as PDF or Excel, to share with interested parties. information can be provided to financial systems for
This system is integrated with the inventory overall maintenance cost tracking. The integration
management module to ensure data consistency enables the creation of financial reports integrated
between orders, stock updates, and other inventory with inventory data, providing a complete picture of
information. The system can be integrated with other medical device management costs. Data exchanged
systems in the hospital, such as patient management between inventory management systems and other
systems or electronic medical records (EMR), to systems must be protected with a high level of
support interoperability. The system implements a security. Uses strong encryption and authentication
strict authorization model to ensure that only protocols to prevent unauthorized access. Implement
authorized users can access, change, or delete order mechanisms to maintain data consistency between
data, stock updates, and reports. Use of strong various systems. Use of transaction or data
security protocols, such as data encryption and access synchronization methods to ensure that information
control, to protect sensitive information in the system. stored in various systems is always current and
The system records every user activity, creating an accurate. Provides an open and easily accessible API
audit log that can be used to track changes or potential to enable integration with other systems. Good API
security events. With this design, the order documentation makes it easier for developers from
management, stock updating, and inventory reporting other systems to understand how to interact with the
systems become integrated, efficient, and responsive inventory management system. Use middleware or
to hospital needs. Ensuring an intuitive user interface integration hubs to simplify and unify the data
and clear data visualization will help users use the exchange process between different systems.
system effectively.16-18 Middleware can facilitate data transformation and
ensure information alignment. The system can provide
Integration with other systems notifications to related parties in various departments
Integration with patient management systems when significant changes in inventory status occur.
allows information exchange between inventory Notifications can be customized according to recipient
management systems and patient data. Patient data, preferences. Implement an activity tracking system
such as health history or certain medical conditions, (audit log) that records every change and interaction
can influence the need for certain medical devices or between the inventory management system and other
influence the selection of medical devices needed. The systems. This information can be used for auditing
integration allows the synchronization of patient care and troubleshooting purposes.19
data with the inventory of medical devices used during
treatment. This helps in monitoring and analyzing Monitoring and evaluation
medical device usage based on the type of treatment System monitoring mechanisms are key to
or patient condition. Patient management systems can maintaining optimal performance and identifying
provide notifications to care staff when certain medical areas that require improvement or improvement. Use
equipment is unavailable or nearing exhaustion, monitoring tools such as Prometheus, Nagios, or
allowing for quick action. Integration with financial Grafana to monitor server health, including CPU
systems allows automatic updates to budgets related usage, memory usage, and storage space. Set
to the procurement and expenditure of medical device threshold limits for notifications to respond quickly to
inventory. Ordering and purchasing information can potential issues. Implement a good logging system to
directly affect the status of the available budget. An document important activities and events in the
inventory management system can track the cost of system. Log analysis can help identify problems or
538
system errors that require attention. Use third-party provide to the management team or stakeholders. This
services such as UptimeRobot or Pingdom to monitor report should include key performance metrics and
website or application availability. Immediate recommendations for improvement. Implementation of
notifications if downtime or performance degradation this monitoring mechanism will help manage and
occurs. Measure application response time for each improve system performance effectively. By detecting
request with tools such as New Relic or Datadog. problems before they impact end users or hospital
Identify endpoints or application functions that are operations, IT teams can make fixes or upgrades
slow or frequently experience increased response quickly, increasing system availability and user
times. Use analytical tools such as Google Analytics to satisfaction.20
monitor user behavior and identify the areas of your
application that are used most often or cause the most 4. Conclusion
problems. Use tools like Wireshark or PRTG to monitor Developing an information system for medical
network traffic and identify potential bottlenecks or device inventory in hospitals is a crucial step in
connection problems. Provides bandwidth monitoring improving the efficiency, availability, and management
to understand network usage by systems and of health resources. Developing an information system
applications. Identify unusual or sudden increases in for medical device inventory in hospitals is not just
bandwidth usage. Use tools such as MySQL about recording and monitoring but also providing a
performance schema or Oracle Enterprise Manager to holistic solution to improve operational efficiency and
monitor database performance. Identify slow queries patient service.
or indexes that need to be optimized. Establish
capacity monitoring to identify database usage trends 5. References
and prevent overload. Warning when approaching the 1. Shahram N, Abidi SSR, Li W, Sharifi H. An
maximum capacity limit. Review system security logs integrated framework for medical device
to detect suspicious activity or potential attacks. inventory management in hospital information
Implement SIEM (security information and event systems. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2016;
management) tools for advanced security log analysis. 219: 173-8.
Perform regular security scans to identify potential 2. Jones B, Morton M, Korn R. Improving
security gaps and system weaknesses. Repair or medical equipment management and patient
improve system security based on findings from scans. safety: a multidisciplinary approach. Jt Comm
Monitor the availability of external services or APIs J Qual Saf. 2014; 30(12): 709-15.
used by the system. Get notified if there is a disruption 3. Chen S, Hsiao K, Huang T. Design and
in third-party services that could affect system implementation of an intelligent medical
performance. Carefully organize notifications so that inventory management system. J Med Syst.
the IT team or system manager can respond 2022; 36(4): 2505-16.
immediately to problems. An effective real-time 4. Islam S, Haque M, Uddin M. An effective
notification mechanism is key to quickly identifying inventory management system for medical
and resolving issues. Implement automatic escalation supplies in emergency health: a case study in
to move issues from a lower priority level to a higher Bangladesh. Int J Environ Res Public Health.
priority level if they are not resolved within a certain 2019; 16(21): 4241.
time. Store historical monitoring data for long-term 5. Dehghanimohammadabadi M,
trend analysis. Compare current performance with Dehghanimohammadabadi A, Shams M.
previous periods to identify significant changes. Hospital equipment management information
Generate regular system performance reports to system: a strategy for planning and control.
539
Iran J Public Health. 2022; 41(3): 91-9. management in healthcare systems. Health
6. Martínez Pérez M, García Santaolalla A, Care Manag Sci. 2019; 22(1): 92-114.
García Jiménez E, Martínez López F. 16. de la Torre-Díez I, López-Coronado M, Vaca C,
Improving the efficiency of a hospital Aguado JS, de Castro C. Cost-utility and cost-
pharmacy stock management system through effectiveness studies of telemedicine,
implementation of an automated information electronic, and mobile health systems in the
system. Farm Hosp. 2013; 37(2): 119-27. literature: a systematic review. Telemed J E
7. Bal G, Civaner M, Yavuz E. Medical device Health. 2015; 21(2): 81-5.
inventory management in hospitals: a 17. Akter S, Ray P. mHealth - An ultimate
literature review. J Healthc Qual Res. 2017; platform to serve the unserved. Yearb Med
32(1): 7-13. Inform. 2020; 19(1): 94-100.
8. Al-Shammary D. Developing a smart hospital 18. Kebede MM, Pischke CR. Popular mobile
information system architecture based on IoT phone apps for diet and weight loss: a content
and cloud computing. Int J Adv Comput Sci analysis. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2015; 3(4):
Appl. 2019; 10(3): 329-36. e102.
9. Fazli A, Sadoughi F. Information system 19. Wac K, Tsiourti C, Stibe A. Lessons learned
strategic planning in healthcare: a systematic from deploying a real-time energy
review. J Res Health Sci. 2018; 18(3): e00417. consumption feedback system in a hospital
10. Salleh NM, Hussain A, Latif RAA, Mokhtar N. environment. Sensors (Basel). 2015; 15(6):
Information systems success model for 14366-86.
healthcare industry: a case study. Procedia 20. Saldaña J. The coding manual for qualitative
Comput Sci. 2015; 72: 380-7. researchers. Sage; 2015.
11. Tan JH, Poh KL, Poh MG, Lin J. A web-based
healthcare inventory management system for
medical resources optimization. Procedia
CIRP. 2017; 64: 209-14.
12. Yazdi-Feyzabadi V, Emami M, Mehrolhasani
MH. Developing an indicator system for
assessing hospital information systems: a
delphi study. J Med Syst. 2016; 40(10): 222.
13. Miah SJ, Gammack J, Hasan N. Medical
information system: a framework and case
study. In: Rocha Á, Correia AM, Adeli H, Reis
LP, Mendonça Teixeira M, eds. New
Contributions in Information Systems and
Technologies. Springer; 2015: 375-85.
14. Lin J, Zhang H, Tang Y, Chen W. An intelligent
and real-time monitoring system for medical
devices. Biomed Res Int. 2018; 2018:
6873514.
15. Aslani N, Diaz A. An integrated approach for
dynamic capacity planning and inventory
540